---
layout: post
title: "We Dont Know How To Spend Our Time"
date: 2025-08-30
categories: [essays, beauty, consciousness, society]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: {% include pull-quote.html quote="This essay examines our modern inability to spend time meaningfully, exploring why we fill our lives with busyness and distractions. It questions the societal glorification of productivity and the loss of true leisure, suggesting that our struggle with free time reveals a deeper existential unease and a disconnection from our authentic selves." author="--" %}

Two people walk the street. One admires the beauty of spring, the orange
flowers and the purple ones near their feet. Red flowers adorn a barren
tree as it tries to find its leaves. The birds sing as many have
returned from their journeys south to feast on the spring delights. The
air feels cool on the face, yet not the piercing cold of winter.

The other person, just looks at their phone. They walk expressionless as
their thumb scrolls on one of the five major apps—only looking up to
check where they’ve reached.

A small example of two wildly different experiences in the same reality.
This is what it has come to. I read a recent report of a man who was
convicted 30 years ago and was just released from prison earlier this
year. He got out and his first comment was “Everyone is hunched over
their phones.”

## The War for Attention

It is a sad truth that many see but no one can do anything about. The
real world, outside our phones, does not have the allure, the charm or
the quick cuts, dance steps and attractive people we see on our digital
devices. There is a war for your attention and currently, screens are
winning.

But how does this affect how we spend our time? Well energy goes where
attention flows. So, today we are a society plagued with two ills:
**Efficiency and utility**. We have been indoctrinated into a world
where these qualities are important and while there may be far reaching
effects to this ‘way of life’, what we have lost is also our ability to
spend our time in the way we used to.

I have talked previously that leisure is the ability to do what one
wants with one’s time. Most of us have become accustomed to see leisure
in our phones. A little mindless scroll here and there keeps our
anxieties at bay. But what if these precise activities are the source of
our existential anxiety in the first place?

It is a grand task to say what the purpose of human beings on this
planet is, so I won’t do that. I will point to the fact that our bodies,
minds, souls, spirits—essentially our entire beings—are much more
intelligent and aware than we give them credit for.

The industrial era ethos of conquering nature, having direct control
over all that moves and making it work efficiently according to our
desires is still somewhat present today. We are flooded with influencer
videos pushing “facts” on us, on how to hack your body, how to
streamline our digestive system and so on. When the simple problem may
be: we don’t move enough.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="Attention is the rarest and purest form of generosity." author="Simone Weil" %}

Our lives are far more sedentary than our ancestors who lived off the
land. Our lives are far more isolated than our ancestors who lived in
community and in joint families. Our lives are pacified by digital
screens that offer us content to amuse, sedate and astonish.

These pacifiers with batteries keep us living in ruts and ways we do not
even think to be unhealthy. So, to understand this, we must explore the
simple idea of ‘Brain Rot’. What happens to our brains when we are given
content that switches images very quickly? When we are given content
that is taken out of context only to give us the funny bit?

Recent research from neuroscientists at Oxford University suggests that
our neural pathways are literally reshaped by digital engagement
patterns. The brain adapts to the rapid switching between stimuli by
building stronger connections for novelty-seeking and weaker ones for
sustained attention—a physical manifestation of what is aptly described
as "Brain Rot.

What happens is we lose the ability to focus. This constant flood of
amusement also undermines the cognitive abilities we need for purposeful
and meaningful activity. Just like we apply our minds to work we need to
apply them for our leisure. We need the capacity to focus to engage
deeply with ideas and to find meaning beyond entertainment. Remember,
our brain is plastic and Brain Rot is precisely how our consumption of
media shapes our cognitive abilities. It also shapes our expectations of
reality and we end up losing the complex thinking needed for meaningful
activities.

## Amusing ourselves to death: A Historical Perspective

Neil Postman’s book ‘Amusing Ourselves to Death’ says that media doesn’t
just shape what we think about, **but how we think**. He compares
Orwell’s ‘1984’ and Aldous Huxley’s ‘A Brave New World’ and believes
Huxley’s prediction is more accurate: we have become a culture seeking
constant amusement, willingly surrendering our capacity for serious
thought.

The book takes a journey into how media developed. Many societies were
oral cultures for the most part until the printing press brought the
written letter, or typography, to many people. The telegraph and
photography changed this as people were then exposed to ‘snapshots of
information’ which was usually decontextualised.

The slow preference of images over words was accelerated by television
where all public discourse took on the form of entertainment.
Television’s emphasis on visual appeal and entertainment value started
to change politics, religion and education. Political discourse started
to become a personality contest. One of the first, and major, examples
of this was the election of Ronald Reagan, who used to be an actor.
Before this, people who listened to the Kennedy-Nixon debate on the
radio favoured Nixon, but people who watched it on TV favoured Kennedy.

Postman even criticised Sesame Street with a valid point. He says the
show, while well-intentioned, taught children that learning should be
entertaining which fundamentally altered expectations about knowledge
acquisition. The truth of the learning process is that it is gruelling
and it gets much worse before it gets better. Knowing something is
superficial endeavour, understanding something is a struggle (but worth
it).

He was particularly concerned about the “*information-action ratio*”.
How much of the information you read can you take action on? We receive
vast amounts of information we can do something about and this creates a
kind of paralysis that is masked as ‘being informed’. Television
privileges immediate, visual truth over complex understanding,
distributing decontextualized facts that leave viewers simultaneously
knowing more and understanding less.

Media affects our cognitive abilities. The constant stimulation of
entertainment slowly wears away our capacity for sustained attention,
logical thought and deep reading. Over-reliance on media makes us
accustomed to receiving information in brief, entertaining segments
which makes us incapable of engaging with complex ideas requiring
sustained focus.

This is not a call to reject media, Postman says, it is a call to
develop “media consciousness” to understand how different forms of media
shape our thinking and then choosing how to use media consciously. He
argues that keeping space for the written word is absolutely crucial to
maintain our capacity for logical, sequential thinking. In this way we
avoid becoming what Huxley warned of: People who “love their oppression”
and “adore the technologies that undo their capacities to think.”

Postman's insights on television now seem almost cute in the age of
social media. What he diagnosed as a troubling shift—from typographic
culture to television—has accelerated exponentially with platforms like
TikTok, Instagram, and Twitter. Where television offered
decontextualized snippets in 30-minute segments, social media delivers
them in 30-second bursts, further fracturing our attention spans. The
algorithms that drive these platforms amplify and reshape our preference
for entertainment, creating feedback loops that privilege emotional
reaction over reasoned response. Today, we swim in oceans of information
while our capacity for meaningful action drowns.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="We must learn to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical
aids, but by an infinite expectation of the dawn, which does not forsake
us even in our soundest sleep." author="Henry David Thoreau" %}

## Reclaiming Our Time: Making Reality Primary 

Philosophers from Husserl to Merleau-Ponty have explored what they call
{% include pull-quote.html quote="*phenomenological presence*" author="the quality of being fully immersed in" %}
one's immediate lived experience. This state of attentive engagement
with reality is an active, intentional way of perceiving that allows the
world to reveal itself to us in its rich complexity. When we achieve
this quality of presence, the ordinary becomes extraordinary—the veins
of a leaf, the texture of wood grain, the subtle emotions crossing a
loved one's face all reveal themselves with surreal clarity. This is a
fundamental human capacity that we've allowed to waste away in our rush
toward constant digital stimulation. Reclaiming this capacity begins
with recognizing what we've lost—a way of being in the world that makes
life meaningful.

So many of us feel we should be doing something valuable with our time.
So many of us feel we want to start a new project, something fulfilling
and meaningful. So many of us would like to paint, write, sing—or learn
these things—but we somehow never get around to it. So many of us can’t
really remember how a day passes, just that it does. What did we do?
Some work and the rest of the gaps were filled in by screens.

Making reality primary means reconnecting with the physical world around
us. The Japanese practice of "*shinrin-yoku*" or forest bathing offers a
powerful counterpoint to digital immersion. Studies show that simply
being present in natural settings for as little as 20 minutes
significantly reduces cortisol levels and increases activity in the
prefrontal cortex—the very region that digital overwhelm tends to
diminish.

I really do wonder if people think constantly living digital realities
is okay. Or have people also lost the ability to self-reflect on their
actions? While I don’t think screens are inherently bad but like any
tool, it depends on how one uses it. Currently, it seems we are using
screens to distract and numb ourselves.

The worst part is the vicious cycle it promotes. When we use screens too
much, our beings revolt. They ask us to engage with reality instead of
the virtual world. This causes us discomfort and anxiety—especially for
those who cannot tune into the message of their feelings or intuition.
The anxiety we feel is not manageable since now we are isolated
individuals, we have work pressure and little help. Earlier, communities
would help each other in such matters. So, those of us that don’t turn
to drugs to solve this anxiety, turn to screens.

And we get hooked onto screens. Most times, I observe people aren’t
really watching anything but constantly scrolling, as if enjoying the
movement. My own experience of slavery to my screen has taught me that
we primarily use this entertainment and distraction as an escape.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="The present is the only time that any of us have to be alive, to know
anything, to perceive, to learn, to act, to change, to heal." author="Jon" %}
Kabat-Zinn

One must concede that screens are a new phenomenon for the human
consciousness, only with us for the last 20-30 years. Still, we are
running out of excuses now. We are either binging screens or trying to
take a social media detox. Any limits we set for our screen time use is
easily bypassed because our minds are addicted—and an addict knows no
limits.

So I felt such a practical essay should end on a practical note. My
advice is simple: Make reality primary and make virtual reality
secondary. Now most of you will think, “Oh yeah, I already do that.” And
I will ask, “Do you, really?” Everything to do with a screen is virtual
reality and to take it from a primary experience for our minds to a
secondary experience takes effort.

If we are awake for 16 hours a day, can we really use screens for only 2
hours? This includes laptops, TV’s, phone and any tablets. It is not
practically possible for many people who need to work on screens but
again, it is not the screen but what it is used for. Our work usually
requires us to focus, and living a purposeful life also requires us to
focus. The challenge we have is to find balance.

Now for those who have more free time, such as artist or people who are
retired, they have more of a responsibility to use it wisely. We must
actively work to build in meaningful activities in our day. This can be
anything, gardening, cooking, sewing, staring at a wall, going for a
walk. But we must try and engage with reality, rather than escape it
through mindless indulgence in digital media.

There are positive ways to use it too. Learning the names of birds, of
flowers and plants on the internet enriches my engagement with the
world. Learning how to play music online enriches my experience at home.
This essay required sustained focus and I hope it will enrich your
future experience.

Again, screens are not bad; we must be careful of letting ourselves fall
into bad habits. **We must recognize what we are losing** in our impulse
for mindless distraction. Take your time into your own hands and not
your phone. And lastly, don’t let your mind fool you into believing
screen use is ‘okay’ when it is not.

I will leave you with this relevant, timely and beautiful poem about
being present in a forest.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="Lost" author="by David Wagoner" %}

Stand still. The trees ahead and bushes beside you

Are not lost. Wherever you are is called Here,

And you must treat it as a powerful stranger,

Must ask permission to know it and be known.

The forest breathes. Listen. It answers,

I have made this place around you.

If you leave it, you may come back again, saying Here.

No two trees are the same to Raven.

No two branches are the same to Wren.

If what a tree or a bush does is lost on you,

You are surely lost. Stand still. The forest knows

Where you are. You must let it find you.
