---
layout: post
title: "Why Do We Expect"
date: 2025-09-01
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay delves into the nature of expectation, exploring how our projections and desires shape our relationships and lead to disappointment. It examines the psychological roots of our expectations, from childhood conditioning to the 'repetition compulsion,' and questions whether we can learn to love people for who they are, not who we expect them to be."
---

"Between what is said and not meant, and what is meant and not said,
most of love is lost." — Kahlil Gibran

Why do we want things from one another? We struggle for power and we
struggle in love. And so the truth is we struggle. It is in the nature
of our desires to expect—to expect something from experience that is yet
to come in the future and by extension, to expect something from one
another. Our ideas of our future harmony lies in expectation from one
another. But yet, there are many caveats.

I find it sad to think how far we go in our desires from one another. If
we have, for example, two people who live by each other’s expectations
and forego any kind of special behaviour and individuality then we have
a kind of harmony that is based on keeping one another happy. But here
is one caveat: In the final analysis, the expectation we have of another
is a form of our individuality, an extension of the way we see
ourselves—because how else do we assume what we want from another?

Is this merely what we are taught? Yes and no. For if it were only what
we were taught and we were true copycats then we would all want the same
thing from one another—strangely, that would make things easier. But we
all want a different flavour from one another and that kind of flavour
is what we have constructed from social cues and our cultural
environment. We filter and choose from what other people have expected
of us, what we have expected from other people and their reactions on
whether they complied or not.

What works for us is not what works for other people and thus here is
the struggle. An antidote to this struggle mentioned commonly in society
is *compromise*. We must aim as people to find a settlement, an
agreement or a reconciliation that brings us together once again.
Whether we do this in society or in our private lives with family or
lovers, there is a negotiation we must undergo to give up our demands,
submit to the other’s demands or ask them to submit to ours in favour of
something they might want too.

This back and forth goes on and we find the constant struggle of the
**expectation-compromise cycle** is keeping us busy. But the question I
want to ask is: can we ever be free of our expectations from one
another?

When we expect something from others, we often reduce them to an object
serving our needs, rather than encountering them as a complete being
whose existence transcends our desires—even our understanding. Our
expectations transform the sacred mystery of another person into a
function, a means to our ends. Martin Buber writes, “When two people
relate to each other authentically and humanly, God is the electricity
that surges between them.”

Erich Fromm in ‘The Art of Loving’, reminds us that love is not a
possession but an active force that requires care, responsibility,
respect, and knowledge. In his work he distinguishes between having and
being—where expectations treat relationships as transactions in the mode
of having, while true connection exists in the mode of being. To truly
love someone is not to expect them to fulfil our needs but for us to
actively participate in their growth while maintaining our own
integrity. This perspective challenges our modern tendency to approach
relationships as contracts where expectations must be met to maintain
harmony.

To be free of expecting, one must be free of desire. For everything we
want in the future is an expectation and to accomplish it, more often
than not, we need people to do it for us. In today’s age we are in a
unique position where we can accomplish many things for ourselves using
technology and we need not expect from people but only our devices,
which comply so regularly. But when our phones don’t do as we want or
our laptops malfunction in their programming we are frustrated—much like
we are frustrated with other people.

We are also shielded by our screens from the reality of technology. It
is not autonomous, it is made by other people. There are millions of
people updating and keeping the software we use everyday functioning.
There are many more who are tirelessly manufacturing more devices that
are constantly trickling into the marketplace and eventually into our
homes and pockets. Yes, even if they’re getting paid for it and making
money from their activities does not preclude the fact that there are
people on the other end of your screens. You are not an isolated entity.

The advent of social media has complicated our expectations further,
creating new forms of anticipation and disappointment. We not only
expect others to respond to our messages instantly but also to perform
relationships publicly in ways that validate our digital personae.
Studies show that people check their phones over 96 times daily—once
every 10 minutes—often seeking the dopamine rush of connection and
validation. Each notification creates a microburst of expectation: *who
has responded? Who has acknowledged me?* This cycle of digital
expectation makes us constantly want to project into the future, making
it more and more difficult to remain present with what is, rather than
what might be.

So in the end, when we expect we end up expecting from people. There
seems to be no way out of this. Self-sufficiency is mostly an illusion
unless one is a farmer and tilling the land to meet bare necessities.
Food, shelter and occasional company is what we all need. In that
company, however, we find the roots of expectation. Similarly, the
farmer ‘expects’ the land to offer food in return for their efforts. But
there’s a small difference. The farmer knows if the land is not treated
properly, if it isn’t respected then we have a poor harvest or worse,
crop failure.

"We have forgotten how to be good guests, how to walk lightly on the
earth as its other creatures do." — Barbara Ward

The farmer knows not to expect more than one can hope for, and yet knows
still to respect the land for what it provides—treating it almost with a
reverence we find uncommon in our society. What if we were also to adopt
the farmer’s attitude? What if we were to treat each other as fertile
soils that could only provide a limited amount of harvest each year?
What if we saw and respected each other as soils of different quality
and composition, suitable for different crops and at different times of
the season? What if, like the farmer, we rotated our expectations from
one another like the farmer rotates crops to keep the land healthy?

Indigenous cultures worldwide offer profound wisdom about reciprocal
relationships. The Potawatomi concept of 'Reciprocity,' sees humans and
nature in a gift economy rather than a market economy. When receiving a
gift from the land or another person, the appropriate response isn't
merely taking but giving back in gratitude—a ritual acknowledgment that
sustains the relationship. Similarly, the Māori concept of
*'Kaitiakitanga'* embodies guardianship and protection rather than
expectation and extraction. These traditions, in their wisdom, refuse to
view relationships as transactional. They see them as sacred bonds
requiring reverence and care.

In relationships, our expectations might shift from what we can get to
what we can nurture. The Japanese practice of *'fukuoka farming'* or
natural farming teaches that the land already knows what to do—our role
is not to force production but to create conditions for natural
abundance. The farmer who practices patience, observation, and respect
discovers that the soil offers more when there are less demands of it.
What might our relationships yield if we approached them with the
patient attentiveness of a natural farmer rather than the urgent demands
of industrial agriculture?

What would that look like? It might look better than it is now. We
demand from each other like we demand from our industrial machines,
constant production. We demand from each other like we demand from our
devices, constant vigilance and constant information. We must always be
self-aware, we must always be informed, we must always be productive. If
we would treat the land like this, it would be barren in a few seasons,
if not less. (This has already been happening to the topsoil in many
parts of the world)

So maybe this is happening in society, we are robbing each other the
fertility of our souls. All in the name of progress, in the name of
economy. In the name of a new god, we have yet to formally worship. We
have not only lost respect for the natural processes of life, we have
lost an awareness of them. We sit indoors, we work on our screens and we
spend our darkness in artificial light and our therapy sessions with
artificial intelligence. Is it a wonder we find nothing that is real in
this world?

We assume, presume, anticipate and await—expectation always lies in the
future. Can we truly expect anything from this one moment that is so
real and so absolute in its ephemerality? What if there was no future?
Obviously, most of us would panic first, think later. It would indeed be
a strange kind of world. In a way, because the future is so uncertain,
it does not exist till it arrives. In a way, our expectations are so
dependent on the compliance of others that they do not exist until the
other agrees. So we do live in a world where there is no future but we
are providing ourselves with the mental security of having one.

What if we looked at each other like a transitory moment? Each person is
not merely a snapshot but a long story that has arrived up to this
point. We can wonder about their past but not yet project their future.
We could look at them as they are, true facts alive in this moment. The
question would not be of expectation and trying to get something out of
them, it would be about respect. An honest observation of a person.
Consequently, it would lead us to an honest observation about ourselves.

"The real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes,
but in having new eyes." — Marcel Proust

We could look at the soil of each other’s lives and find ways to share
with each other, our gifts and our struggles. The nature of reality is
that it is a whole and we can never be truly separated from one another
or the elements of life. Any idea of separation is just that—an idea,
not reality. We could then see the natural quality of exchange present
in all of life. We wouldn’t have to expect so much. We could just
respect this natural give and take and thereby each other and life
itself.

When we cling to specific outcomes in our relationships, we set
ourselves up for disappointment, as reality rarely conforms to our
mental projections. Meditation and mindfulness invite us to notice our
expectations as they arise—not to eliminate desire completely, which may
be impossible, but to hold our desires lightly, with an open palm rather
than a closed fist. In this space we may discover what Thich Nhat Hanh
calls 'interbeing'—the profound reality that we are not separate
entities with discrete boundaries but interconnected beings who
co-create each moment. Our expectations often reinforce the illusion of
separation, while **presence** dissolves it, revealing the natural
harmony that exists beneath our projections.

Maybe then we wouldn’t struggle so much. Maybe then could truly enjoy
the natural gifts of life and the company of each other.
