---
layout: post
title: "Our Industrial Heritage"
date: 2025-08-11
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: ""
---

**Progress and ecological grief**

![Industrial Revolution](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1504917595217-d4dc5ebe6122?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw1fHxpbmR1c3RyeXxlbnwwfHx8fDE3MzEwMzY5NjV8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Christopher Burns on Unsplash*

It seems we are back where we started. We all have the freedom to do
what we want but now we face an existential crisis caused by money, the
economy and the ever present thrills of progress. Our climate is
changing and those most acutely aware of it experience *ecological
grief* at this situation. This wasn't what technological, industrial and
social progress had promised all those years ago.

What then is progress? If we look back over the last two hundred years
of progress and human development we can look at how humanity has indeed
grown, but also how we haven't. Whether we look at these as missed
opportunities or things yet to come, we know we are at the threshold of
a breakthrough in our ways of thinking. Maybe, one would be inclined to
think we are not but that serves no purpose for two reasons: it is a
pessimistic thought which inspires not hope, but despair.

The second reason, if we really look at the ways humanity has
progressed, stagnated and then advanced again, we can see that in
reality we are always at the cusp of something new. It is only later
that it becomes evident or visible. Some may notice it as it emerges and
the many may notice it as it becomes normalised and they would compare
what is now with 'what it used to be'.

![Ancient Rome](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1646236165023-b1713bd8a3ab?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwzNHx8YW5jaWVudCUyMHJvbWV8ZW58MHx8fHwxNzMxMDM2OTg5fDA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Yahya Momtaz on Unsplash*

**Historical perspectives: From Rome to the Industrial Revolution**

Our industrial heritage in many ways is how our societies and economies
operate and do business with each other. It underlies the morals with
which we treat employees, the hidden thinking behind contracts, mergers
and large business empires. It could very well be that Imperialism never
died but rather simply changed hands—from the aristocrats to the
bourgeoisie.

It's interesting to consider why industrialisation came about in the
17th century and not during the Roman Empire. For in both eras, there
was ample wealth and resources to fund these activities that would
create business and opportunities for all. Empowering the poor and
multiplying the wealth of the rich. But why did Rome not take this
course of action?

There are several theories. In Roman society, labour was not seen as
something very positive but rather as something that slaves did. It was
enough for the aristocrats to employ slaves and get the things they
needed done to be done. Slaves were cheap and easy to 'manage'. Why then
would they bother building machines that would reduce labour and
increase output? With large hordes of slaves arriving from conquered
nations, the problem was probably putting them to work.

Another factor was a lack of laws favouring commerce among aristocracy
with some laws expressly forbidding them from engaging in trade or
commerce. This limited large private efforts to succeed. In contrast
large public efforts like aqueducts, roads, harbours and so on were
managed well largely because the government backed these projects and
allowed for work to be contracted to many small groups.

However, Rome did show periods of economic growth and the costs of doing
‘business’ were lowered to make commerce viable. Archaeological evidence
from sites across the Roman Empire reveals sophisticated mining
operations, particularly in Britain and Spain. Excavations have
uncovered extensive coal mining operations dating from the 2nd century
BCE to the 1st century CE, with remnants of advanced ventilation systems
and drainage technologies. The discovery of slag heaps ( a hill made
from waste material, such as rock and mud, left over from mining) and
metallurgical waste suggests large-scale industrial production, while
recovered artifacts indicate standardized manufacturing processes. These
three hundred or so years were remarkable for growth of Rome and its
people, however it was still not even close to what was happening in
Britain on the verge of the industrial revolution.

In ancient Rome there was no culture of invention and discovery.
Intellectual property was not patented and innovations needed to be
guarded and kept secret. Thus when Rome fell a lot of great ideas went
with it. However, during the renaissance the patent ensured someone's
intellectual property was safeguarded and encouraged innovation.

According to the majority of economic historians, innovations were key
to modern economic growth. Economist Mark Koyama says that there have
been three large groups of people who believe specific factors were
crucial for the burst of the modern economy. The first group favour
market expansion as the major cause for sustained economic growth. The
second group favour the view that colonialism and its empires used
natural resources, like coal for example, to crucially fuel modern
economic growth. The third group favours innovations—both economic and
cultural. Economist and historian Dierdre McCloskey mentions the latter
reason as more influential in her book: "Bourgeois Equality: How Ideas,
Not Capital or Institutions, Enriched the World". She says ideas, not
capital, were the oxygen of the Great Enrichment in the 1800s.

Particularly noteworthy was the development of proto-capitalist systems
in Italian city-states, which managed to maintain their traditional
social structures while pioneering new economic methods. Cities like
Venice and Florence created sophisticated banking systems, maritime
insurance, and complex trading networks while preserving their cultural
institutions and social hierarchies. This unique blend of innovation and
tradition would later influence the development of modern capitalism
across Europe.

**The transformation of economic behaviour**

The bourgeoisie, representing the middle or upper middle class in the
18th century, were the ones most to benefit in the rise of
industrialisation. The difference was key as they emerged in the 11th
century in central and western Europe in cities dedicated to commerce.
They further formed guilds, self-organised groups that consolidated
their power as well as informed their activities. They were seen as
being below aristocrats but by the 20th century that changed and the
term bourgeoisie, in a capitalist society, is synonymous with the ruling
upper class.

This transformation has social and psychological factors that had
similarities and differences in Europe and ancient Rome. The aristocrats
of both societies were engaged in, what Erich Fromm calls, *radical
hedonism*. The premise is "defined as the satisfaction of any desire or
subjective need a person may feel." Philosophers in the seventeenth and
eighteenth century started to voice very similar ideas. Thomas Hobbes
said happiness (*cupiditas or desire*) is the continuous progress from
one greed to another. As the aristocrats would engage in the pursuit of
pleasure, now so too would the bourgeoisie and they had the resources
and means to do so.

Fromm notes a change in the eighteenth century that allowed for the
emergence of capitalism. In medieval and primitive societies, "economic
behaviour was determined by ethical principles." So economic behaviour
emerged from natural tendencies of exchange already present in human
behaviour. It was guided by ethics, social norms and cultural cues that
applied to humans in the contexts and environments they lived in.
However, during the rise of capitalism, economic behaviour detached from
ethics and human values. The "economic machine" became a system that was
to run by itself and according to its own laws. In time, the economic
machine started to dictate human values and even replace social norms in
many societies, small and large.

This transition, in its emerging stage, was significantly impacted by
Protestant ethics, as Max Weber theorized. Religious values did not
disappear entirely, but were rather reinterpreted to align with
capitalist ideals. The Protestant work ethic transformed traditional
Christian virtues into economic essentials. The virtues of diligence,
which in modern terms we see as productivity, and frugality, which today
is simple ‘being smart with one’s money’, started suggesting to people
that worldly success could be a sign of divine favour. In other words,
God helps those who help themselves. Which suddenly turned religious
values into an exercise in selfishness. This transition bridged the gap
between traditional religious morality and what later became common
capitalist practices.

The emerging merchant class developed sophisticated frameworks of ethics
that tried to reconcile profit-seeking with traditional moral values.
They created elaborate justifications that depicted commerce as a form
of public service, arguing that the pursuit of profit, when conducted
honestly, contributed to the common good. This hybrid ethical system
allowed them to maintain their social respectability while engaging in
increasingly complex financial operations. It was a natural transition
where economic activities had started becoming attractive and people
needed to find existing concepts to describe this emerging profession.

The result of this was a drastic turn in viewing events caused by
economic activities as akin to those occurring by natural law. Even the
word "profit" departed from meaning "profit for the soul" or essentially
what is good for our well-being, psychological and spiritual. Profit was
simply material and monetary profit and this period was where the
"middle class threw away not only its political shackles but also bonds
of love and solidarity." The empowerment of the individual took center
stage.

Questions that governed economic growth were not "what is good for human
beings?" but rather "What is good for growth of the system?" and
everyone started to assume what is good for the growth of the system is
good for human beings.

![Change](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1570358934836-6802981e481e?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw0fHxjaGFuZ2V8ZW58MHx8fHwxNzMwOTQyMTcwfDA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Markus Spiske on Unsplash*

**Where do we go from here?**

Yes, prosperity led us down a comfortable path but what were the costs?
For if nothing comes free then we must have paid for all this economic
and material progress with psychological and spiritual deterioration.
One does wonder. Our industrial heritage, alive and kicking today now
shows the worst possible outcome we could have imagined—the possibility
of a mass global extinction.

Should we aim to address this problem then we must first understand it.
Treating it like a issue we can solve overnight will only lead to the
ever fallible strategy of 'treating the symptoms rather than the cause'.
If we endeavour to understand that we put economic growth higher than
environmental protection then we may see a very basic conflict in
action. To the gatekeepers of economic and global activity, I would ask:
Are you willing to sacrifice economic growth for natural protection? I
can only imagine the hesitant reply: "Is it not possible to have both?"
Maybe not anymore.

Where then does this take us as a person who deems themselves to be a
'cog in the wheel', a person who thinks they have little to no power and
cannot make global change happen. A person that believes the only people
that can save us now are the policy makers and environmentalists. I
would urge such a person to remove the blinders from their eyes and see
how even if one is a cog in the wheel, they are an indispensable part of
the wheel. If we imagine a wooden cogwheel working inside intricate
machinery and we are each individual cog. Now, if a single cog removes
itself from the mechanism, the cogwheel will skip in its rotation. Then
the other cogwheels attached to it will skip. If another cog removes
themselves, then we will see the whole mechanism shake and stumble. This
is the power of a cog.

> 'If you think you are too small to make a difference, try sleeping
> with a mosquito.' —Dalai Lama XIV

The power we as individuals can express comes from a flow of power that
pervades all of society. Rather than using the word 'holding power' I
choose to use the flow of power for the reason that we can only truly
have power if we express it and not if we hold it. Society is made of
individuals and individuals are influenced by society. It is a cyclical
process that seeks no end but rather expression. Indeed, there are
people who hold more *responsibility* than others. The inseparable
relationship between power and responsibility make us realise how, even
in small ways, we are accountable for our actions.

Many revolutions have been started by people from lower classes who
thought they had no power until they took it into their own hands. It is
not something we can all do, but we can start somewhere.

When we think of what we can do, how we can express ourselves I would
point to one thing: Education. That we learn about what others have
thought of this issue and how we can apply it in our current context.
Education comes not only through reading or university but also through
discussions and dialogue. We educate ourselves not by mere memorization
of information or facts but also through contemplation of what we are
learning. When we attempt to relate the material we are learning to
experiences and situations in our lives, we gain a better understanding
of it. Thus we are poised with new connections in our minds and an
updated map to navigate the world.

If we do not educate ourselves we risk acting from our old patterns. In
crafting new solutions we risk falling back on outdated thinking which
lie at the basis of *what doesn't work* in our current context.

We need to relearn our thinking models. Our contexts and our situations
will keep changing and where we would be conveniently inclined to say
'we need to catch up', I would also say 'we need to participate in this
change'. For in the latter statement there is no 'falling behind' or
'getting ahead' rather an involvement in the process.

If we are involved in the process of how our societies evolve and grow
(or not) then we are constantly changing as well. Thus we are more
competent and able to deal with issues that will inevitably come up in
any generation. Thus, we will not give into the anger of our
powerlessness but the passion of our desire to participate in the
process of change. Thus, we will be the change we want to see in the
world.

\[Original Text\]

It seems we are back where we started. We all have the freedom to do
what we want. But we are now facing a kind of existential crisis caused
by money, the economy and the ever present thrills of progress. Our
climate is changing and those most acutely aware of it experience
*ecological grief* at this situation. This wasn’t what technological,
industrial and social progress had promised all those years ago.

What then is progress? If we look back over the last two hundred years
of progress and human development we can look at how humanity has indeed
grown, but also how we haven’t. Whether we look at these as missed
opportunities or things yet to come, we know we are at the threshold of
a breakthrough in our ways of thinking. Maybe, one would be inclined to
think we are not but that serves no purpose for two reasons: it is a
pessimistic thought which inspires not hope, but despair. The second
reason, if we really look at the ways humanity has progressed, stagnated
and then advanced again, we can see that in reality we are always at the
cusp of something new. It is only later that it becomes evident or
visible. Some may notice it as it emerges and the many may notice it as
it becomes normalised and they would compare what is now with ‘what it
used to be’.

Our industrial heritage in many ways is how our societies and economies
operate and do business with each other. It underlies the morals with
which we treat employees, the hidden thinking behind contracts, mergers
and large business empires. It could very well be that Imperialism never
died but rather simply changed hands—from the aristocrats to the
bourgeoise.

What might escape our minds is why industrialisation came about in the
17^(th) century and not during the Roman Empire. For in both eras, there
was ample wealth and resources to fund these activities that would
create business and opportunities for all. Empowering the poor and
multiplying the wealth of the rich. But why did Rome not take this
course of action?

There are several theories. In Roman society, labour was not seen as
something very positive but rather as something that slaves did. It was
enough for the aristocrats to employ slaves and get the things they
needed done to be done. Slaves were cheap and easy to ‘manage’. Why then
would they bother building machines that would reduce labour and
increase output? With large hordes of slaves arriving from conquered
nations, the problem was probably putting them to work.

Another factor was a lack of laws favouring commerce among aristocracy
with some laws expressly forbidding them from engaging in trade or
commerce. This limited large private efforts to succeed. In contrast
large public efforts like aqueducts, roads, harbours and so on were
managed well largely because the government backed these projects and
allowed for work to be contracted to many small groups.

However, Rome did show periods of economic growth and the transaction
costs on trade were lowered to make commerce viable. There is also
research that shows rapid growth, coal mining, pollution and animal
consumption in between the 2^(nd) century BCE and the 1^(st) century CE.
These three hundred or so years were remarkable for growth of Rome and
its people, however it was still not even close to what was happening in
Britain on the verge of the industrial revolution.

In ancient Rome there was no culture of invention and discovery.
Intellectual property was not patented and innovations needed to be
guarded and kept secret. Thus when Rome fell a lot of great ideas went
with it. However, during the renaissance the patent ensured someone’s
intellectual property was safeguarded and encouraged innovation.

According to the majority of economic historians, innovations were key
to modern economic growth. Economist Mark Koyama says that there have
been three large groups of people who believe specific factors were
crucial for the burst of the modern economy. The first group favour
market expansion as the major cause for sustained economic growth. The
second group favour the view that colonialism and its empires used
natural resources, like coal for example, to crucially fuel modern
economic growth. The third group favours innovations—both economic and
cultural. Economist and historian Dierdre McCloskey mentions the latter
reason as more influential in her book: “Bourgeois Equality: How Ideas,
Not Capital or Institutions, Enriched the World”. She says ideas, not
capital, were the oxygen of the Great Enrichment in the 1800s.

The bourgeoise, representing the middle or upper middle class in the
18^(th) century, were the ones most to benefit in the rise of
industrialisation. The difference was key as they emerged in the 11^(th)
century in central and western Europe in cities dedicated to commerce.
They further formed guilds, self-organised groups that consolidated
their power as well as informed their activities. They were seen as
being below aristocrats but by the 20^(th) century that changed and the
term bourgeoise, in a capitalist society, is synonymous with the ruling
upper class.

This transformation has social and psychological factors that had
similarities and differences in Europe and ancient Rome. The aristocrats
of both societies were engaged in, what Erich Fromm calls, *radical
hedonism*. The premise is “defined as the satisfaction of any desire or
subjective need a person may feel.” Philosophers in the seventeenth and
eighteenth century started to voice very similar ideas. Thomas Hobbes
said happiness (*cupiditas*) is the continuous progress from one greed
to another. As the aristocrats would engage in the pursuit of pleasure,
now so too would the bourgeoise and they had the resources and means to
do so.

Fromm notes a change in the eighteenth century that allowed for the
emerge of capitalism. In medieval and primitive societies, “economic
behaviour was determined by ethical principles.” Thus Economic behaviour
had direct links to human behaviour and was guided by ethics that
applied to humans. However, during the rise of capitalism, economic
behaviour detached from ethics and human values. The “economic machine”
became a system that was to run by itself and according to its own laws.
The result of this was a drastic turn in viewing events caused by
economic activities as akin to those occurring by natural law. Even the
word “profit” diverged from meaning “profit for the soul” or essentially
what is good for our well-being, psychological and spiritual. Profit was
simply material and monetary profit and this period was where the
“middle class threw away not only its political shackles but also bonds
of love and solidarity.” The empowerment of the individual took center
stage.

Questions that governed economic growth were not “what is good for human
beings?” but rather “What is good for growth of the system?” and
everyone started to assume what is good for the growth of the system is
good for human beings.

Yes, prosperity led us down a comfortable path but what were the costs?
For if nothing comes free then we must have paid for all this economic
and material progress with psychological and spiritual deterioration.
One does wonder. Our industrial heritage, alive and kicking today now
shows the worst possible outcome we could have imagined—the possibility
of a mass global extinction.

Should we aim to remedy this phenomena then we must first understand it.
Treating it like a problem we can solve overnight will only lead to the
ever fallible strategy of ‘treating the symptoms rather than the cause’.
If we endeavour to understand that we put economic growth higher than
environmental protection then we may see a very basic conflict in
action. To the gatekeepers of economic and global activity, I would ask:
Are you willing to sacrifice economic growth for natural protection? I
can only imagine the hesitant reply: “Is it not possible to have both?”
Maybe not anymore.

Where then does this take us as a person who deems themselves to be a
‘cog in the wheel’, a person who thinks they have little to no power and
cannot make global change happen. A person that believes the only people
that can save us now are the policy makers and environmentalists. I
would urge such a person to remove the blinders from their eyes and see
how even if one is a cog in the wheel, they are an indispensable part of
the wheel. If we imagine a wooden cogwheel working inside intricate
machinery and we are each individual cog. Now, if a single cog removes
itself from the mechanism, the cogwheel will skip in its rotation. Then
the other cogwheels attached to it will skip. If another cog removes
themselves, then we will see the whole mechanism shake and stumble. This
is the power of a cog.

'If you think you are too small to make a difference, try sleeping with
a mosquito.’

—Dalai Lama XIV

The power we as individuals can express comes from a flow of power that
pervades all of society. Rather than using the word ‘holding power’ I
choose to use the flow of power for the reason that we can only truly
have power if we express it and not if we hold it. Society is made of
individuals and individuals are influenced by society. It is a cyclical
process that seeks no end but rather expression. Indeed, there are
people who hold more *responsibility* than others. The inseparable
relationship between power and responsibility make us realise how, even
in small ways, we are accountable for our actions.

Many revolutions have been started by people from lower classes who
thought they had no power until the took it into their own hands. It is
not something we can all do, but we can start somewhere.

When we think of what we can do, how we can express ourselves I would
point to one thing: Education. That we learn about what others have
thought of this issue and how we can apply it in our current context.
Education comes not only through reading or university but also through
discussions and dialogue. We educate ourselves not by mere memorization
of information or facts but also through contemplation of what we are
learning. When we attempt to relate the material we are learning to
experiences and situations in our lives, we gain a better understanding
of it. Thus we are poised with new connections in our minds and an
updated map to navigate the world.

If we do not educate ourselves we risk acting from our old patterns. In
crafting new solutions we risk embedding old models of thought which lie
at the basis of *what doesn’t work* in our current context. We need to
relearn our thinking models. Our contexts and our situations will keep
changing and where we would be conveniently inclined to say ‘we need to
catch up’, I would also say ‘we need to participate in this change’. For
in the latter statement there is no ‘falling behind’ or ‘getting ahead’
rather an involvement in the process. If we are involved in the process
of how our societies evolve and grow (or not) then we are constantly
changing as well. Thus we are more competent and able to deal with
issues that will inevitably come up in any generation. Thus, we will not
give into the anger of our powerlessness but the passion of our desire
to participate in the process of change. Thus, we will be the change we
want to see in the world.
