---
layout: post
title: "The Unacknowledged Wound Reflections On Narcissism"
date: 2025-09-04
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: ""
---

## Gemini Ver 2. The Unacknowledged Wound

## Reflections on Narcissism and the Refusal of Suffering

Sometimes, we encounter people locked in a peculiar struggle—wrestling
with profound inner suffering they refuse to name. They seem to run from
a shadow, a pain from their past or their nature, yet this very flight
often leads them into greater difficulty. It’s a paradox that invites
questions, especially when this pattern hardens into something
resembling narcissism.

I started to wonder about such people, those who have faced difficult
lives but have not yet accepted that feeling of difficulty. Underneath
their composed exteriors is a feeling of unease and a kind of resentment
towards anyone who would challenge their fate. For example, someone who
has been offended by the smallest of gestures:

“How could you treat me like that?” They would ask, “you don’t know how
difficult my life has been.” It seems in this narrative, they have begun
to not only victimise themselves, but also make enemies out of everyone
else.

I wondered whether this was a kind of narcissism because narcissists
usually victimise themselves—especially vulnerable narcissists. I’ve
tried to think about why people are so self-obsessed. Why they’re not
able to see beyond their own experience. I started to question if any of
this had to do with the refusal of suffering, the denial of one’s fate.

Of course, we talk of narcissism as if it affects only a few, but we all
have certain narcissistic tendencies. If we reduce the fundamentals of
narcissism to self-obsession and self-centredness, then we will find
that in order to live life, all of us have to engage in this kind of
perspective. **This self-focus is, perhaps, a natural function of the
ego, the part of us concerned with identity, survival, and navigating
the world**.

Healthy self-esteem, a sense of competence, the drive to achieve—these
can share roots with narcissistic traits, representing an ego
functioning in a balanced way. But where it goes too far is when this
kind of orientation becomes destructive, where the ego's needs eclipse
empathy and authentic connection. And by destructive, I also mean in
situations where one finds it hard to keep harmony in their
relationships. So we could separate this into healthy and unhealthy
forms of narcissism, the latter being the focus of this exploration.

It seems like people come into this life with their own challenges and
limitations. These are not only defined by their circumstance, but also
their temperament and personality. Once they reach a certain age, there
is a necessity to surmount challenges and work on these issues of
personality. I think it is here most people get stuck. They’re not able
to let go of these ideas that life has always treated them a certain
way, and in the end, this philosophy sticks with them throughout their
relationships, work and life.

This running away, this refusal is what psychology might call a
**defence mechanism**. Denial becomes a shield against the sharp edges
of their reality, a refusal to accept the hand fate has dealt them or
the limitations of their own nature or the reality of their own
insecurities. And often, what cannot be accepted within is projected
outwards; the flaws and pains they deny in themselves are seen and
condemned in others, clouding their interactions.

Beneath this shield, a carefully constructed persona often takes root.
This is what some thinkers call a **'False Self**'. It's a necessary
fortress built in early life, perhaps, to protect a core too vulnerable
for the world as they experienced it. Yet, this fortress can become a
prison, preventing authentic connection, even with oneself, locking away
the very feelings it was meant to shield and demanding constant
validation from the outside world to maintain its structure.

I wonder if this is why people who have had difficult lives can be so
vindictive. The tendency to be angry when they’re hurt. I guess it is
their only protective mechanism where they couldn’t show sadness in
their environment. But there is also a deeper layer: the inability to
feel sadness. I read somewhere once that a narcissist truly pities
themselves, but is never able to verbalise or truly feel that feeling.
It remains a buried ache, inaccessible. Anger becomes the only
permissible outlet when vulnerability is deemed too dangerous.

This profound sensitivity underpins their reaction when challenged. A
seemingly minor critique, a boundary set, can feel like a devastating
attack, triggering what psychologists term a **'narcissistic injury**'.
The resulting anger or vindictiveness is beyond a simple hurt; it's an
explosive defence against the perceived threat of annihilation to that
fragile, defended self. A desperate attempt to restore the shaky balance
of their self-esteem.

What is troubling is how this kind of philosophy causes hurt and
distress to the people around them. Because of their situation, such
people have developed a lack of empathy and as a consequence, they
trained themselves not to perceive this distress.  
“Everything is fine,” they say. “is it not?”  
They seem genuinely unable, or unwilling, to register the emotional
impact of their actions.

This inner turmoil often spills outwards. Because they cannot face their
own difficulties, they may unconsciously project these onto others,
finding fault or assigning blame where it doesn't belong. This can
create a confusing picture: sometimes they might strive to appear
morally upright, yet simultaneously act with a sense of superiority that
feels exhausting to witness and contradicts their claims.

Beneath this, there's often a profound restlessness. Anyone avoiding
their own feelings will feel uncomfortable in silence. They struggle to
sit with their true feelings, to find stillness. Instead, they
constantly seek external distractions—obsessions, new actions, thrills,
or novelties. This relentless pursuit is often a desperate attempt to
keep the deep-seated suffering, the feeling they refuse to acknowledge,
at bay. Their actions, though seemingly selfish, are driven by this need
to escape their inner state.

This constant running and avoidance breeds a deep **dissatisfaction**,
not just with themselves, but **with life itself.** And this pervasive
unhappiness is often **projected** most intensely onto those closest to
them. Loved ones can find themselves judged harshly, condemned, or
dismissed, seemingly out of nowhere. Naturally, this causes hurt and
increases sensitivity in those around them. Tragically, this very
sensitivity is often met with further condemnation, locking everyone
into a painful, repeating cycle of blame and resentment, where genuine
connection struggles to survive.

This internal landscape—the focus on self, the avoidance of deep
feeling, the need for external fixes—finds echoes in wider cultural
observations. The historian Christopher Lasch, in his 1979 book *The
Culture of Narcissism*, diagnosed a societal shift towards intense
self-preoccupation. He described the rise of "psychological man,"
feeling alienated and insecure, constantly seeking affirmation from
others rather than grounding themselves in history or community. As
Lasch noted, "*To live for the moment is the prevailing passion - to
live for yourself, not for your predecessors or posterity.*"

Lasch's cultural critique resonates powerfully with the individual
pattern we're exploring here. The person avoiding their suffering is
living intensely in the moment, precisely to avoid the weight of the
past. Their focus on their own needs, their search for validation or
distraction, mirrors that "psychological man" seeking external props for
a fragile sense of self. It suggests, perhaps, that these individual
struggles are sometimes amplified by, or find fertile ground in, broader
cultural tendencies.

The difficulty with such a person is not how to handle them, but how to
stop them when they go into their fit of anger, despair, and
victimisation. This is an often-repeated cycle of their inability to
feel the feeling that has always accompanied them. This experience is
very painful to watch from an outside perspective because those who can
see, can feel; they are made to feel what this person is going through.
When the fit subsides, the narcissist does not remember much, for this
is an eternal recurrence for them. But the people close to the
narcissist remember and feel this fit very vividly.

Empathy is the natural human response to another person suffering. In a
strange way, the narcissist uses this empathy to enslave the people
around them to their own aims. This manipulative aspect of a narcissist
is also something that comes across as Machiavellian in nature. However,
it is more of a way for them to keep their sanity amid the undercurrent
feeling that is causing them to lose it.

**The question lingers**: why do they do this? I don’t know for
sure, but perhaps reflecting on my own path offers some perspective.
While I myself can say that I’ve had a difficult life as well (like many
people), I have not descended into this narcissism because I cultivated
the ability to feel. Feeling is very important because it is immediate,
but it is also linked to our past in a very raw sense. Feeling often
doesn’t condemn but reveals whatever is. Feeling tends to open the
perception of any person to their real lived experience, and if one has
the ability to reflect, then they can often make profound changes in
their life.

But the lack of feeling, or the overriding of feeling by thought, is
often the cause of this malaise that we call narcissism. For the person
who is totally self-obsessed and self-centred, we should feel pity, for
that is not an easy experience to go through—to not be able to channel
into one’s own feeling, to constantly need something or someone to
distract them from it, to always live in this restless denial of
everything except their own desires and wishes. That seems to me like a
very tiring experience of life.

But does this mean I should let a narcissist control me? No. I would
even challenge them so that they can understand how to go beyond
themselves. Even feeling suffering through someone else is a beginning.

But I must concede that I do not know more than this, for fixing
something like this is beyond the scope of someone who has not been
there and emerged out of it. I also wonder if this is something to be
fixed. Maybe **‘outgrow’** is a better word. For when we say fix, we
label something as wrong and problematic, while the act of outgrowing
something means that it no longer serves a purpose in this stage of
life.

Maybe narcissism served a purpose socially in the past generation; maybe
it still serves a purpose culturally in many different places. Maybe
this excessive self-centredness is not a problem, but a very common fact
of the way people cope in society. Certain people probably use this
“technique” to cope and engage with society. Maybe this isn’t all bad,
for the people who I have had in my life who one may call Narcissists
are still good people. They are wounded people, but I truly believe
their heart is in a good place. I talked about this with a friend once,
and I said, “Regardless of what I said, I still like you. You may talk
only about yourself, but you think about others, do things for others. I
admire that.”

So it is also a lesson in life that not everything that is bad, is all
bad and not everything that is good, is all good. More often than not we
get strange mixes of the two in life, and in the people that we share
this life with. Sometimes we have to make do with what we get and try
and have the best experience from it. But no matter what situation we
find ourselves in, whether we are expressing narcissistic tendencies, or
we are dealing with someone who does, the prescription is the same: *be
empathetic to the experience of someone else*. We must all try to feel
what someone else might be feeling, and that in itself is a saving
grace. It not only gives us the ability to get out of our ego-driven
perspective, but also allows us to feel. And feeling, in this world, in
today’s society, is all important.

It is very natural, though, that the ego wishes to take centre stage,
and narcissism is probably just a manifestation of this tendency. It is
possible that these people feel a conflict that those who do not express
this tendency, do not know of.

So, we arrive at the point where we may not have solved anything, but we
have understood something. For the experience of such people not only
teaches us that empathy and feeling are important, but also that the
desires of the ego will never be fulfilled, and if we give ourselves
over to the ego, then dissatisfaction will forever be our friend.

To end this, I would only like to say that we should strive to be kind
to those who we find in such situations. They are not bad people; they
are good people dealing with a bad circumstance, a circumstance they
have not been able to accept. So it is our duty to try and offer them
this understanding, as well as **not being available** to engage in
their fits of despair. More than this, I believe we cannot do. For the
ways of human life, the soul and all the things that drift in between
are not known by this mind that thinks. It is known by this heart that
feels and this entire being that lives life to experience it. We cannot
know, but yet we should try to understand.

## Gemini Ver.1 

Perhaps it begins with a quiet observation, a noticing of patterns in
those who carry heavy burdens yet refuse to acknowledge the weight. A
life lived always bracing against an impact that has already occurred, a
constant running from a feeling that permeates their days, even as their
actions seem to invite more difficulty.

I started to wonder about these people, those who have faced difficult
lives but have not yet accepted that feeling of difficulty. Underneath
there is a feeling and a kind of resentment towards anyone who would
challenge their fate. “How could you treat me like that?” They would
ask, “you don’t know how difficult my life has been.” It seems in this
narrative, they have begun to not only victimise themselves, but also
make enemies out of everyone else.

I had thoughts about whether this was a kind of narcissism because
narcissists usually victimise themselves—especially vulnerable
narcissists. I try to think about why people are so self-obsessed. Why
they’re not able to see beyond their own experience. I started to wonder
if any of this had to do with the refusal of suffering, the denial of
one’s fate.

Of course, we talk of narcissism as if it affects only a few, but we all
have certain narcissistic tendencies. If we reduce the fundamentals of
narcissism to self-obsession and self-centredness, then we will find
that in order to live life, all of us have to engage in this kind of
perspective. Healthy self-esteem, a sense of competence, the drive to
achieve – these can share roots with narcissistic traits. But where it
goes too far is when this kind of orientation becomes destructive. And
by destructive, I also mean in situations where one finds it hard to
keep harmony in their relationships. So we could separate this into
healthy and unhealthy forms of narcissism, the latter being the focus of
this unease.

It seems like people come into this life with their own challenges and
limitations. These are not only defined by their circumstance, but also
their temperament and personality. Once they reach a certain age, there
is a necessity to surmount challenges and work on these issues of
personality. I think it is here most people get stuck. They’re not able
to let go of these ideas that life has always treated them a certain
way, and in the end, this philosophy sticks with them throughout their
relationships, work and life.

This running away, this refusal is what psychology might call a
**defence mechanism**. Denial becomes a shield against the sharp edges
of their reality, a refusal to accept the hand fate has dealt them or
the limitations of their own nature. And often, what cannot be accepted
within is projected outwards; the flaws and pains they deny in
themselves are seen and condemned in others, clouding their
interactions.

Beneath this shield, a carefully constructed persona often takes root.
This is what some thinkers call a **'False Self**'. It's a necessary
fortress built in early life, perhaps, to protect a core too vulnerable
for the world as they experienced it. Yet, this fortress can become a
prison, preventing authentic connection, even with oneself, locking away
the very feelings it was meant to shield and demanding constant
validation from the outside world to maintain its structure.

I wonder if this is why people who have had difficult lives can be so
vindictive. The tendency to be angry when they’re hurt. I guess it is
their only protective mechanism where they couldn’t show sadness in
their environment. But I also think there is a deeper layer: the
inability to feel sadness. I read somewhere once that a narcissist truly
pities themselves, but is never able to verbalise or truly feel that
feeling. It remains a buried ache, inaccessible. Anger becomes the only
permissible outlet when vulnerability is deemed too dangerous.

This profound sensitivity underpins their reaction when challenged. A
seemingly minor critique, a boundary set, can feel like a devastating
attack, triggering what psychologists term a **'narcissistic injury**'.
The resulting anger or vindictiveness isn't just simple hurt; it's an
explosive defence against the perceived threat of annihilation to that
fragile, defended self, a desperate attempt to restore the precarious
balance of their self-esteem.

What is troubling is how this kind of philosophy causes hurt and
distress to the people around them. Because of their situation, such
people have developed a lack of empathy and as a consequence, they
trained themselves not to perceive this distress. “Everything is fine,”
they say. “Is it not?” They seem genuinely unable, or unwilling, to
register the emotional impact of their actions.

People like these also face problems where they negatively pawn these
difficulties onto someone else. The trial of a person trying to be
morally righteous while also being personally superior to someone else
which just gets very tiring; they seem to betray their actions. They are
always selfish, but also restless. They know not to stay in the
stillness of their feelings, so hence they always look for actions,
excitements, novelty—anything that will distract them from this
deep-seated suffering that they constantly exist in.

Aside from all the restlessness that such a state of being brings along,
there is a deep-seated dissatisfaction with life itself. This
dissatisfaction is often projected onto people that a narcissist is
closest with. This makes them judge, condemn, and even outright dismiss
the people they claim to love. This causes people around them to grow
more sensitive. This sensitivity is also condemned and hence the eternal
cycle of blame and remorse goes on.

Perhaps this inner landscape, this relentless pursuit of external
validation while denying internal reality, echoes what Christopher Lasch
observed in The Culture of Narcissism. He diagnosed a societal drift
towards a therapeutic sensibility that, paradoxically, fostered a
preoccupation with the self, where "psychological man," alienated and
insecure, seeks continual affirmation rather than engaging with deeper
moral or communal ties. Lasch wrote, "To live for the moment is the
prevailing passion - to live for yourself, not for your predecessors or
posterity." This relentless present-focus mirrors the narcissist's
avoidance of past pain and future consequence.

The difficulty with such a person is not how to handle them, but how to
stop them when they go into their fit of anger, despair, and
victimisation. This is an often-repeated cycle of their inability to
feel the feeling that has always accompanied them. This experience is
very painful to watch from an outside perspective because those who can
see, can feel; they are made to feel what this person is going through.
When the fit subsides, the narcissist does not remember much, for this
is an eternal recurrence for them. But the people close to the
narcissist remember and feel this fit very vividly.

It’s their empathy, which is the natural human response to another
person suffering, and in a strange way, the narcissist uses this empathy
to enslave the people around them to their own aims. This manipulative
aspect of a narcissist is also something that comes across as
Machiavellian in nature. However, it is more of a way for them to keep
their sanity amid the undercurrent feeling that is causing them to lose
it.

Why do they do this? I don’t know for sure. While I myself can say that
I’ve had a difficult life as well, I have not descended into this
narcissism because I cultivated the ability to feel. Feeling is very
important because it is immediate, but it is also linked to our past in
a very raw sense. Feeling often doesn’t condemn but reveals whatever is.
Feeling tends to open the perception of any person to their real lived
experience, and if one has the ability to reflect, then they can often
make profound changes in their life.

But the lack of feeling, or overriding of feeling by thought, is often
the cause of this malaise that we call narcissism. For the person who is
totally self-obsessed and self-centred, we should feel pity, because
that is not an easy experience to go through—to not be able to channel
into one’s own feeling, to constantly need something or someone to
distract them from it, to always live in this restless denial of
everything except their own desires and wishes. That seems to me like a
very tiring experience of life.

But does this mean I should let a narcissist control me? No. I would see
their state of being as a challenge for them so that they can understand
how to go beyond themselves. Even the act of feeling suffering through
someone else is a beginning.

But I must concede that I do not know more than this, for fixing
something like this is beyond the scope of someone who has not been
there and emerged out of it. I also wonder if this is something to be
fixed. Maybe ‘outgrow’ is a better word. For when we say fix, we label
something as wrong and problematic, while the act of outgrowing
something means that it no longer serves a purpose in this stage of
life.

Maybe narcissism served a purpose socially in the past generation; maybe
it still serves a purpose culturally in many different places. Maybe
this excessive self-centredness is not a problem, but a very common fact
of the way people cope in society. Certain people probably use this
“technique” to engage with society. Maybe this isn’t all bad, for the
people who I have had in my life who may have these qualities are still
good people. They are wounded people, but I truly believe their heart is
in a good place. I had a friend who I talked about this with, and I told
him, “Regardless of what I said, I still like you. You may talk only
about yourself, but you think about others, and do things for others. I
admire that.”

So it is also a lesson in life that not everything that is bad, is all
bad and not everything that is good, is all good. Sometimes we get
strange mixes of the two in life, and in the people that we share this
life with. Sometimes we have to make do with what we get and try and
have the best experience from it. But no matter what situation we find
ourselves in, whether we are expressing narcissistic tendencies, or we
are dealing with someone who does, the prescription is the same: be
empathetic to the experience of someone else. We must all try to feel
what someone else might be feeling, and that in itself is a saving
grace. It not only gives us the ability to get out of our ego-driven
perspective, but also allows us to feel. And feeling, in this world, in
today’s society, is all important.

It is very natural, though, that the ego wishes to take Centre stage,
and narcissism is probably just a manifestation of this tendency. It is
possible that these people feel a conflict that we, who do not express
this tendency, do not know of. So it is that we arrive at the point
where we may not have solved anything, but we have understood something.
For the experience of such people only teaches us that empathy and
feeling are important, but also that the desires of the ego will never
be fulfilled, and if we give ourselves to that, then dissatisfaction
will forever be our friend.

To end this, I would only like to say that we should strive to be kind
to those who we find in such situations. They are not bad people; they
are good people dealing with a bad circumstance, a circumstance they
have not been able to accept. So it is our duty to try and offer them
this understanding, as well as not being available to engage in their
fits of despair. More than this, I believe we cannot do. For the ways of
human life, the soul and all the things that drift in between are not
known by this mind that thinks. It is known by this heart that feels and
this entire being that lives life to experience it. We cannot know, but
yet we should try to understand.

## Original

\[a nice intro to the content here\]

I started to wonder about people who have faced difficult lives but have
not yet accepted that feeling of difficulty. As if they are still
running away from that feeling, and even though in their daily actions,
they seem to be actually making their life difficult as well. Underneath
there is a feeling and a kind of resentment towards anyone who would
challenge their fate. “How could you treat me like that?” They would ask
“you don’t know how difficult my life has been”

It seems In this narrative, they have begun to not only victim
themselves, but also make enemies out of everyone else. I had thoughts
about whether this was a kind of narcissism because narcissist usually
victimise themselves—especially vulnerable narcissists. I try to think
about why people are so self obsessed. Why they’re not able to see
beyond their own experience. I started to wonder if any of this had to
do with the refusal of suffering the denial of one’s fate.

It seems like people come into this life with their own challenges and
limitations. These are not only defined by their circumstance, but also
their temperament and personality. Once they reach a certain age, there
is a necessity to surmount challenges and work on these issues of
personality. I think it is here most people get stuck. They’re not able
to let go of these ideas that life is always treated them a certain way,
and in the end, this philosophy sticks with them throughout their
relationships, work and life. Was troubling is how this kind of
philosophy causes, hurt and distress to the people around them. Because
of their situation, such people have developed a lack of empathy and as
a consequence, they trained themselves not to perceive this distress.
“everything is fine.” They say. “is it not?”

I wonder if this is why people who have had difficult lives are so
vindictive. The tendency to be angry when they’re hurt. I guess is there
only protective mechanism where they couldn’t show sadness in their
environment. But I also think there is a deeper layer of the inability
to feel sadness. I read somewhere once that a narcissist truly pities
themselves, but is never able to verbal or feel that feeling. I guess
here we also go into the root of Y. The denial of suffering is one of
the core aspects of any form of grandiose self-image.

Of course, we talk of narcissism as if it affects only a few, but we all
have certain narcissistic tendencies. If we reduce the fundamentals of
narcissism to self obsession and self-centredness, then we will find
that in order to live life, all of us have to engage in this kind of
perspective, but where it goes too far is when this kind of orientation
becomes destructive. And by destructive, I also mean in situations where
one finds it hard to keep harmony in their relationships. So we could
separate this into healthy and unhealthy forms of narcissism.

\[some examples from modern science here\]

\[bridging sentence to the next section here\]

People like these also face problems where they negatively pawn these
difficulties onto someone else. The trial of a person trying to be
morally righteous while also being personally superior to someone else
which just gets very tiring, they seem to betray their actions. They are
always selfish, but also restless. They know not to stay in the
stillness of their feelings so hence they always look for actions,
excitements, novelty anything that will distract them from this
deep-seated suffering that they constantly exist in.

Aside from all the restlessness that such a state of being brings along,
there is a deep-seated dissatisfaction with life itself. This
dissatisfaction is often projected onto people that a narcissist is
closest with. This makes them judge, condemn, and even outright dismiss
the people they claim to love. This causes people around them to grow
more sensitive. This sensitivity is also condemned and hence the eternal
cycle of blame and remorse goes on.

The difficulty with such a person Is not how to handle them, but how to
stop them when they go into their fit of anger, despair, and
victimisation. This is an often rat cycle of their inability to feel the
feeling that has always accompanied them. This experience is very
painful to watch from them and outside perspective because those who can
see can feel, they are made to feel, what this person is going through.
When the fit subsides, the narcissist does not remember much for this is
an eternal recurrence for them. But the people close to the nurses,
remember and feel this fit very vividly. It’s their empathy, which is
the natural human response to another person suffering and in a strange
way, the narcissist uses this empathy to enslave the people around them
to their own aims.

This manipulative aspects of a narcissist is also something that comes
across as Machiavellian in nature. However, it is more of a way for them
to keep their sanity in the undercurrent, feeling that is causing them
to lose it. Why do they do this? I don’t know for sure while I myself
can say that I’ve had a difficult life as well, but I have not descended
into this narcissism because I cultivated the ability to feel feeling is
very important because it is immediate, but it is also linked to our
past in a very raw sense. Feeling often doesn’t condemn but reveals
whatever is. Feeling tends to open the perception of any person to their
real live experience, and if one has the ability to reflect, and they
can often make profound changes in their life.

But the lack of feeling or overriding of feeling by thought is often the
cause of this malaise that we call narcissism. For the person who is
totally self obsessed and self centred, we should feel pity for that is
not an easy experience to go through to not be able to channel into
one’s own feeling to constantly need something or someone to distract
them from it to always live in this restless denial of everything,
except their own desires and wishes. That seems to me like a very tiring
experience of life. But does this mean I should let a narcissist control
me? No.

I would see the state of being as a challenge for them so that they can
understand how to go beyond themselves. Even feeling suffering through
someone else is a beginning. But I must concede that I do not know more
than this, for fixing something like this is beyond the scope of someone
who has not been there and emerged out of it. I also wonder if this is
something to be fixed. Maybe ‘outgrow’ is a better word. For when we say
fix, we label something as wrong and problematic while the active out
growing, something means that no longer serves a purpose in this stage
of life.

Maybe narcissism serve a purpose socially in the past generation, maybe
it still serves a purpose, culturally in many different places. Maybe
this excessive self-centredness is not a problem, but a very common fact
of the way people cope in society. Certain people probably use this
“technique” to cope and engage with society. Maybe cis isn’t all bad for
the people who I have had in my life who I can call Narcissists are
still good people. They are wounded people, but I truly believe their
heart is in a good place. I had a friend who I talked about this with,
and I told him. “regardless of what I said, I still like you. You may
talk about yourself, but you think about others, and I admire that.”

So it is also a lesson in life that not everything that is bad, is all
bad and not everything is good, is all good. Sometimes we get strange
mixes of the two in life, and in the people that we share this life
with. Sometimes we have to make do with what we get and try and have the
best experience from it. But no matter what situation we found ourselves
in, whether we are expressing narcissistic tendencies, or we are dealing
with someone who does, the prescription is the same: be empathetic to
the experience of someone else. We must all try to feel what someone
else might be feeling, and that in itself is a saving Grace. Normally
gives us the ability to get out of our ego driven, but also allows us to
feel. And feeling in this world, in today’s society is all important.

It Is very natural, though that the ego wishes to take Centre stage and
narcissism is probably just a manifestation of this tendency. It is
possible that these people feel a conflict that we, who do not express
this tendency, do not know of. So it is that we arrive at the point
where we may not have solved anything, but we have understood something.
For the experience of such people only teaches us that embassy and
feeling are important, but also that the desires of the ego will never
be fulfilled in if we give ourselves to that then dissatisfaction will
forever be our friend.

To end this number, only like to say that we should strive to be kind to
those who we find. In such situations they are not bad people. They are
good people dealing with a bad circumstance, a circumstance they have
not been able to accept. So it is our duty to try and offer them this
understanding as well as not being available to engage in their fits of
despair. More than this, I believe we cannot do. For the ways of human
life, the soul and all the things that drift in between are not known by
this mind that thinks. It is known by this heart that feels and this
entire being that lives life to experience it. We cannot know, but yet
we should try to understand.
