---
layout: post
title: "Discipline And Chaos"
date: 2025-08-27
categories: [essays, consciousness]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay explores the delicate balance between discipline and chaos, arguing that both are essential for a meaningful life. It examines how our modern obsession with order and control can lead to a sterile existence, while embracing chaos can foster creativity and resilience. The piece advocates for a life lived in the 'borderlands' where structure and spontaneity meet."
---

*“Out of chaos, find simplicity. From discord, find harmony.”* —*Bruce
Lee*

There are so many kinds of discipline. There is a discipline of the
heart, a discipline of the mind, and the discipline we use everyday in
our lives with our bodies, trying to constrain them into some kind of
path. All discipline is directed toward some kind of outcome, some state
of being or some specific action or series of actions. However, if one
solely practices discipline for the sake of discipline, then I believe
there is some kind of sickness there.

This modern obsession with discipline reflects what philosopher Alan
Watts called “the fallacy of misplaced concreteness”, which is **our
tendency to mistake the abstract for the real**. This is our tendency to
take a concept like ‘discipline’ and impose it on the real world of
things, events and people. Watts observed that when we try to impose
rigid order on life, we often create more chaos, like trying to smooth
ripples in water by pressing them down, only to create more ripples. The
very act of forcing order becomes a source of disorder.

This misunderstanding manifests in our daily lives, where discipline for
its own sake becomes just an exercise in control. We do not do life any
favours by managing and directing its processes into little boxes.
Discipline for goals is one thing but discipline for its own sake,
another. Why are we pushing ourselves to be disciplined when we have
nothing to be disciplined for?

Of course, there are many reasons for this. Sometimes it just simply to
keep ourselves from breaking down. Other times we are trying to remember
our habits and use them to remind us of who we are. We find we are
taking this path to understand why we do what we do, but merely seeking
to be disciplined actively avoids this understanding. Discipline is
never the *why*, it is the *how*.

Nature's way: Order within Chaos

In nature, we find a different kind of order. Biological systems
demonstrate what scientists call “dynamic equilibrium”, a constant dance
between order and chaos that maintains life itself. Consider how your
body maintains its temperature: not through rigid control, but through
countless small adjustments, a continuous interplay between warming and
cooling mechanisms. Too much control, too much discipline in this system
would actually cause it to fail. Your body doesn't maintain 37°C
(98.6°F) by strictly enforcing this temperature; rather, it oscillates
within a small range, adapting and responding to both internal and
external changes.

*“In all chaos there is a cosmos, in all disorder a secret order.” —Carl
Jung*

This natural wisdom is reflected in the ancient Chinese concept of
*wu-wei*, or “non-forcing”. Unlike the Western notion of discipline as
control and suppression, *wu-wei* suggests accomplishing things by
working with the natural flow rather than against it. It's the
difference between damming a river and building a waterwheel—one fights
the water's nature, while the other harnesses it while respecting its
essential character. Just as trying to smooth water creates more
ripples, fighting against water's nature with dams rather than working
with it through waterwheels shows our fundamental misunderstanding of
natural order.

This makes me wonder about the kind of people who live regimented and
disciplined lives, but are at a stage where they don't really need to.
They're at a stage where they can let go and relax and be at peace.
Sadly, I guess that's one of the core things about such people and about
this attachment to discipline—it is an avoidance of this illness and
aliveness that comes with living. Obsessively seeking for discipline is
an avoidance of spontaneity, of play, of naturalness; it is an avoidance
of all that truly makes this game of life. The regimented life and the
way it seems to play out in people who seek it often does not look like
life—it looks like gardening with barbed wire.

Gregory Bateson, in his seminal work “Mind and Nature,” spoke of what he
called “*the pattern that connects*”, which is the living, breathing web
of relationships that makes up our world. He saw that a crab's anatomy,
a flower's petals, and human social structures all share underlying
patterns of organization. Like the symmetry in a leaf that mirrors the
branching of a tree, these patterns repeat at different levels
throughout nature. He argued that our obsession with categorization and
control blinds us to these essential connections. When we ask how many
kinds of discipline there are, or how we distinguish discipline from
habits, perhaps we're asking the wrong questions. The real question is:
how do we maintain our connection to life's natural rhythms while living
in a world that demands us to control it?

This wisdom isn't new. Indigenous cultures worldwide have long
understood the importance of living in harmony with natural rhythms
rather than trying to dominate them. The *Aanishinaabe* people of North
America, for example, organize their lives around the “thirteen moons,”
each with its own teachings and activities aligned with natural cycles.
This isn't discipline imposed from outside, but rather a deep attunement
to the natural world's own patterns of order and chaos.

This alignment with natural cycles appears across ancient cultures. The
Hindu calendar, known as *Panchang*, divides the year into six seasons
(*Ritus*), each with its own festivals, agricultural practices, and
dietary recommendations that mirror nature's rhythms. Similarly, the
Chinese lunar calendar, with its 24 solar terms (節氣, *jiéqì*),
precisely tracks seasonal changes, from ‘Spring Begins’ to ‘Greater
Cold’, guiding everything from farming to festival celebrations. These
calendars weren't merely time-keeping devices but sophisticated systems
for living in harmony with natural cycles.

## Between Order and Instinct: The Human Paradox

So what’s the difference between rituals & routine and discipline that
seeks to check our disobedient tendencies? It seems quite obvious that
discipline is a form of suppression. There is a form of pushing down
that which normally wishes to come up. We mistakenly believe that this
is possible, that we can actually push things down for a long time and
have them never come up, but they always do. A volcano erupts because it
is building pressure. A kettle whistles because it has been steaming for
a while. So in a similar way, our life force also forces its way through
and acts out when we subject ourselves to too much pressure in
discipline.

This suppression starts early. It is naturally easier to discipline
children for they find it hard to remember what they've lost. They are
also more malleable and are likely to listen because they don't have a
choice. They are also more likely to accept authority, for that is a key
part of them growing up. Why do we want control others to behave like
us? Our persistence to create perfect and absolute forms of order around
us has become a near obsession, but the inner landscape cannot be
ordered and perfected. In its imperfection, it is already perfect.

> “The child is not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be lit.”
> —Plutarch

Can we look at the forest and call it disordered? Can we look at the
ocean and tell the waves they are chaotic? In life and nature, we see
forms of order and chaos emerging side-by-side, often as a consequence
of each other. Our necessity for a one-sided rational view on life is
distorting our perception.

Ideas of perfect and imperfect hold a key in this discussion, for they
reveal the heart of our relationship with order and chaos. What do we
mean by perfection? Can perfection be improved upon or is it a finished
product frozen in time? When we really look at our ideals of perfection
closely, we find not only fear lurking beneath but also a mistaken
idealism—one that contrasts harshly to the ‘dynamic perfection’ we see
in nature. Our obsession with order is equally a fear of chaos that has
morphed into disdain for disorder in the world.

This ‘disorder’ in natural world and in our lives is completely nature.
Our divorce from natural rhythms became complete when we began
surrounding ourselves entirely with human-made environments—constructed
dwellings where we could, for the first time, experience the illusion of
order without chaos. Like children who do not know what they've lost, we
too did not know what we had lost in this pursuit for absolute order.

As our environments became more controlled, our lives followed suit.
Schedules became increasingly planned, systems more rigid, until we
convinced ourselves that everything could—and should—be controlled. The
key to maintaining this artificial order? Discipline. A hard hand and a
strict stick became the tools of choice, as if forcing order could
somehow create harmony. It would be too easy for me to say that we are
killing ourselves with excessive discipline. I shall rather say
something more dramatic—we are killing each other with excessive
discipline. For whether it comes from outside or inside, discipline
seems to allow no questioning. It does not allow a change in approach.

So I ask you, is a discipline that can be changed really discipline?
This question (and your answer) reveals our fundamental misunderstanding
of true discipline. Perhaps what we call discipline should instead be
called attunement, a dynamic response to life's ever-changing rhythms.

## Embracing Imperfection

Finding our way forward requires a fundamental shift in how we view
imperfection itself. The Japanese aesthetic philosophy of *wabi-sabi*
offers us profound insight here. Unlike Western ideals of perfection,
wabi-sabi finds beauty in impermanence and incompleteness. It celebrates
the cracks, the weathering, the asymmetry that tells the story of time's
passage. A tea bowl with visible repairs might be considered more
beautiful than a flawless one, because it carries within it a history of
life lived, broken, and mended.

The only path that seems logical to me is to embrace this kind of
imperfection. It is to allow ourselves to connect to an order that is
greater than us—an order that is us. Our natural bodies and the way they
function are wonders if we truly look at them, and who says these are
disciplined? Our bodies, the seasons, the rhythms of the Earth
themselves all dance in this mixture of order and chaos. It is only our
minds that seek security and predictability that glorify this rigid
order.

Consider the golden ratio, that mysterious 1.618 that appears throughout
nature—from the spiral of galaxies to the arrangement of leaves on a
stem. It represents neither perfect order nor complete chaos, but rather
a harmonious balance between the two. This is the ratio we might
metaphorically apply to our lives to create a balance between discipline
and spontaneity, between structure and flow.

Let's try to remember that all things beautiful are somehow strangely
broken, that all things aesthetically pleasing have a hint of
imperfection. The ancient practice of *Kintsugi*, where broken pottery
is repaired with gold, teaches us that our breaks and imperfections can
become our most beautiful features. They tell the story of our
resilience, our ability to adapt and grow through life's inherent chaos.

To give ourselves a chance at being human once more, we have to embrace
uncertainty, spontaneity, and ourselves. This means developing what
indigenous cultures might call “deep listening”, which is not just
listening to others or to nature, but to the wisdom of our own bodies
and spirits. It means understanding that true discipline might look more
like a dance than a military march, more like a flowing river than a
concrete channel.

In this process of embracing both order and chaos, discipline and
spontaneity, we might find something far more valuable than perfect
control—we might find ourselves, whole and complete, cracks and all. For
in the end, it is not our ability to maintain perfect order that makes
us human, but our capacity to find beauty and meaning in life's inherent
messiness.

May we remember that life itself exists in this delicate balance between
chaos and order. Like a jazz musician who knows the rules well enough to
break them beautifully, we might learn to play with both structure and
freedom, finding our own rhythm in this dance we call life.

> "Nature does not hurry, yet everything is accomplished." —Lao Tzu
