---
layout: post
title: "The Lost Art Of Suffering Part 3"
date: 2025-08-21
categories: [essays, consciousness]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "In our rush to smooth out life’s rough edges, we’ve begun to lose something precious—the art of sitting with ourselves in the quiet spaces between doing. This essay explores how our society's relentless push for positivity and productivity prevents us from engaging with the contemplative life, a state that allows for genuine human experience, including the necessary shadows of pain and doubt."
---

{% include pull-quote.html quote="Let everything happen to you: beauty and terror. Just keep going. No feeling is final." author="Rainer Maria Rilke" %}

# This is part 3 of a 3 part series on the truth about happiness.

![dwarf statue in garden](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1528659432556-884cfe1480ef?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwyNHx8Y29udGVtcGxhdGlvbnxlbnwwfHx8fDE3MzI3MzYzNzZ8MA&ixlib.rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Dorota Dylka on Unsplash*

When did our hearts become so busy they forgot how to rest? We live in a
world more ordered than ever, yet something ancient in us still yearns
for wildness, for chaos, for the untamed spaces where life flows freely.
Our inner compass, shaped by millennia of evolution, finds itself
spinning in this digital age—detecting disorder even in our most
carefully constructed order. Our survival instinct is still alive but it
is now being used identify achievement with survival. Where technology
was supposed to make our lives better, it is making our instincts
malfunction.

Like children who’ve outgrown their oldest instincts but haven’t quite
grown into their newest tools, we find ourselves caught between ages.
Our technological advancement races ahead while our consciousness pants
to catch up. There is a level of responsibility and awareness attached
to how technologically advanced we get. With limitless power and no
sense of responsibility we will destroy ourselves. Yet, this is escaping
our awareness because running technology the way it is running seems to
be good for business but bad for humanity. But for how long can we stay
pacified?

So, what are we losing? Maybe, we don’t know because we never really
knew we had it. This strange feeling of living in a hyper-connected
society is precisely what makes us feel like something is missing and
we’re just noticing now. In this rush to smooth out life’s rough edges
we’ve begun to lose something precious—the art of sitting with ourselves
in the quiet spaces between doing.

## The inability to contemplate

![man in white crew neck shirt wearing black framed eyeglasses holding white tablet computer](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1614454542040-a0125d70ba2b?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw4fHxkaXN0cmFjdGlvbnxlbnwwfHx8fDE3MzI4NjIwNTV8MA&ixlib.rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Nubelson Fernandes on Unsplash*

“A man who lies to himself, and believes his own lies, becomes unable to
recognize truth, either in himself or in anyone else, and he ends up
losing respect for himself and for others.” – Fyodor Dostoevsky, “The
Brothers Karamazov”

To suffer is to scrape the sandpaper on our material existence,
revealing the underlying soul in all things. In our digital age, where
every discomfort can be immediately medicated with distraction, we have
lost what Han calls “the contemplative life” – the ability to stay with
our pain long enough to learn from it. He writes: “Pain is a fundamental
experience of negativity that cannot be removed from life. A life
consisting purely of positivity would be unbearable.”

While we shield ourselves from every negative experience, we rush to
transform every moment of discomfort into an “opportunity for growth.”
In this way, we lose something essential to human experience. We
discussed the violence of positivity in the last essay as well as our
modern transparency society. Everything must be visible, measurable, and
positive. “Transparency society eliminates all forms of otherness,” Han
writes. “Everything must be smoothed out and levelled, made transparent.
No resistance is permitted.” This transparency becomes its own form of
violence, an obligation that’s always demanding we constantly perform
our happiness, our success, our optimization. There is no room for
shadow, for depth, for the sacred darkness that gives life its
dimension. Actually, nothing is sacred anymore for all moments of life
can be milked for some kind of gain.

He continues, “The society of transparency is an inferno of the same.”
Yet genuine human experience requires shadow, requires mystery, requires
what Han calls “the negativity of withdrawal”—the ability to remain
hidden, to maintain mystery, to preserve depth.

This brings us to a crucial understanding: the very mechanisms we’ve
created to connect and express ourselves—our digital platforms, our
culture of constant sharing and visibility—may be the very things
preventing genuine human experience.

Martin Buber illuminates this modern disconnection through his concept
of I-It versus I-Thou relationships. Where we once met life as a
‘Thou’ - a living presence to be encountered in its fullness - we now
treat everything, including ourselves, as an ‘It’ - objects to be
analysed, optimized, and used. Yet authentic living requires us to
restore that I-Thou relationship with our own experience, to meet each
moment as a living presence rather than a problem to be solved.

Han says that our phones and screens slowly reshape how we think and
feel, without us even noticing the change. It is a subtle form of power,
programming and controlling us without any defence from our side. This
is a crisis of contemplation, “The loss of the ability to contemplate is
connected to the absolutization of visible, active life. The increase in
the active-hyperactive (no space for the passive) darkens
contemplation’s space of possibility.”

Han proposes this way of being as an alternative to this regime of
enforced positivity and transparency. He continues: “Contemplation is a
form of resistance against the totalizing tendency of the active life.
It opens up spaces of breath and spirit.” This meditative stance
requires what he calls “the gift of listening,” the ability to dwell in
silence and negativity without running away from it and without rushing
to transform it into something productive or positive. Without trying to
make it some kind of spiritual business practice.

The following poem illustrates the kind of attention - unhurried,
unmarked, unmeasured - our souls are starving for.

‘I don’t know exactly what a prayer is.  
I do know how to pay attention,  
how to fall down into the grass,  
how to kneel down in the grass,  
how to be idle and blessed...’  
– Mary Oliver ‘The Summer Day’

Many indigenous communities still practice collective silence and
ritualized contemplation. The Australian Aboriginal concept of
*‘dadirri’* - inner deep listening and quiet still awareness - offers a
powerful counterpoint to our culture of constant noise and performance.
These traditions remind us that contemplation isn’t some luxury we’ve
evolved beyond, but an essential human capacity we’re in danger of
losing.

That’s part of the journey forward we need to undertake. In an era of
progress, modernity and technology, if we forget ourselves it is not a
cost we can afford. If we decide to become thinking, conceptual machines
then no matter how advanced we are technologically, we’ll barely be more
alive than the machines that guide us.

“The contemplative life is not passive, but rather a highly active
engagement with negativity. It requires the courage to face the
darkness.” – Byung-Chul Han

In life, caution can be advised more generally than recklessness. But
what if we have erred on the side of too much caution? Then the only
antidote to be prescribed is recklessness, wildness. What is wild is
untameable, uncontrollable and is, for all intents and purposes, free.

## Do we fear what’s real?

{% include pull-quote.html quote="The cure for pain is in the pain." author="Rumi" %}

![a woman covering her eyes with her hands](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1706510568563-4dfe62d2aeb6?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwzM3x8aWxsdXNpb258ZW58MHx8fHwxNzMyNzY1MzM1fDA&ixlib.rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Leila de Haan on Unsplash*

In this final terrain beyond our assumptions, we must confront a
fundamental truth: authenticity cannot be optimized, measured, or
performed. The contemplative life that Han advocates and the deep
understanding of loss and transformation that Kübler-Ross discovered
through her work with the dying both point to the same revelation – that
our most authentic experiences often arise from what society tells us to
avoid.

Kübler-Ross observed that “The most beautiful people we have known are
those who have known defeat, known suffering, known struggle, known
loss, and have found their way out of those depths…\[but\] We run away
from the beautiful mystery of death. We hide it behind walls and
flowers.” Similarly, we hide our genuine presence behind walls of
positivity and flowers of refinement.

Han articulates this as a form of resistance. We’ve forgotten how to
simply be. Like children who’ve never learned to sit still, we fidget
through our lives - always reaching for the next task, the next goal,
the next achievement. The simple art of doing nothing has become as
foreign to us as a language we’ve forgotten how to speak. Yet it is
precisely in this ‘doing nothing’, in this ability to stay with our
experience without trying to make something of it, that we find our
authentic being. For our true self is always hiding behind
acceptability, distraction and over-thinking. It is always calling out
for our attention but we refuse to sit with it—with ourselves.

Kübler-Ross’s groundbreaking work with dying patients revealed that
authentic living often emerges from our closest encounters with loss and
mortality. She noted that “Those who learned to know death, rather than
to fear and fight it, become our teachers about life.” This parallels
Han’s observation that “A life that is completely untouched by death is
not life but rather mere survival.”

## Reclaiming authentic experience

If our senses are thinking and feeling our way through life, should it
not stand to reason that they’re telling us what we need to see and
feel? The constant push for improvement and positivity creates
projections based on our desires. We feel compelled to chase these
desires and avoid those demons but it’s all in our heads. We become
trapped in a world of our mind’s images either running towards or
running away from. A state of being that never allows us to simply be.
Real life, is just beyond that boundary—all we have to do is let our
senses show us what we need to see, to let our feelings bathe us in what
we need to feel.

Both Han and Kübler-Ross, from their distinct vantage points, recognize
that our attempts to sanitize life of its darker aspects ultimately
diminish our capacity for real living. Kübler-Ross noted that “Learning
to live well and to die well are one and the same thing,” while Han
observes that “The society of positivity gives rise to artificial forms
of living that alienate us from the fundamental experience of life,
which also includes negativity, pain and death.”

As we move toward a conclusion, we must recognize that the path forward
isn’t through more improvement, more positivity, or more performance.
The contemplative dimension allows us to experience life in its
fullness—both its light and shadow, its peaks and valleys. It requires
bravery to resist the constant pressure optimize experience and to chase
positivity. It requires us to stand firm in our authentic experience
**especially** when that experience includes pain, doubt, or darkness.

And so, the challenge becomes not how to optimize our experience, but
how to remain authentic in a world that demands performance.

The truth about positivity isn’t that it’s wrong—it’s that it’s
incomplete. Like a painting that uses only bright colours, it lacks the
depth and dimension that shadow provides. As we navigate this
achievement society with its demands for constant enhancement and
performance, perhaps our most radical act can be simply this: to honour
our full spectrum of experience, to resist the violence of enforced
positivity not through more violence, but through what Han calls **“the
contemplative ‘no’”** —a quiet but firm refusal to reduce our human
experience to what can be optimized, measured, or performed.

This no is a refusal to engage in falseness, a refusal to diminish our
experience to the superficial. It is the real protest to stand up to our
right to live full human lives. No one said it wasn’t meant to be scary,
no one said that sadness wasn’t involved—but it was meant to be real.
The more we engage in these forms of violence we’ve discussed, we’re
robbing ourselves of that joy.

For true fulfilment lies not in the desperate chase for happiness or the
anxious avoidance of pain, but in the courage to remain present with
whatever arises, trusting that our hearts—in their infinite wisdom—know
exactly what we need to feel, even when society tells us otherwise.

Simone Weil understood this when she wrote that ‘attention is the rarest
and purest form of generosity.’ She saw that true attention - the kind
that doesn’t seek to change or fix or optimize - is a form of love. ‘The
capacity to give one’s attention to a sufferer is a very rare and
difficult thing,’ she noted, ‘it is almost a miracle; it is a miracle.’
Perhaps this miracle is exactly what our achievement-obsessed culture
needs most.

For, in the end, our hearts beat with both contraction and expansion.
Each beat contains both silence and sound, both pause and movement.
Perhaps this rhythm—not our achievements or our optimizations—is our
truest teacher about how to live: embracing both light and shadow, both
joy and sorrow, both doing and being. For it is in this complete embrace
that we find not just happiness, but something far more precious: *our
authentic selves*.
