---
layout: post
title: "The Myth Of Modernity"
date: 2025-08-25
categories: [essays, society]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay challenges the 'myth of modernity,' arguing that despite technological advancements, human nature remains largely unchanged. It questions whether progress has truly empowered humanity or led to a spiritual and ecological crisis, urging a reconnection with our ancient heritage to navigate the future."
---


{% include pull-quote.html quote="We live in a decaying age. Young people no longer respect their
parents. They are rude and impatient. They frequently inhabit taverns
and have no self-control." author="Inscription, 6000-year-old Egyptian tomb" %}

## The Illusion of Progress

When did we get so modern that we forget how old we are? Not as
individuals but as a collective, as a species. We are right to assume
that our technological advancements are actually advancing us and not
retarding us but if we look closely we may find some surprising details.
Though we are technologically wiser, our human nature is shining through
in its most ugly aspects. Where it was once thought that our lower and
lesser natures might be saved by modern technology and information, we
sadly find that not to be true. Greed is still greed, albeit with
smartphones. Ignorance is still ignorance, albeit with a general
consensus from the internet. Hatred is still rampant and with the rise
of the internet has only found new and ever widening digital channels to
spread its false message.

![green leafed trees](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1526572728358-228f6b8ca29b?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwyNHx8bW9kZXJufGVufDB8fHx8MTczODQ3MTQ5NXww&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Serhat Beyazkaya on Unsplash*

We are not modern. I want to start out by stating this fact—we are
living in a myth of modernity. We didn’t get a fresh start with all this
development. We don’t just get to throw away millennia of evolution and
growth as a species. And we’d best let go of the notion that we are the
smartest species on this planet because first, it only strokes our ego
and makes us all more complacent and less responsible. Second, we are
not the smartest species for if we were, we would not leave a wake of
destruction on our natural environment. If you truly think about it, a
smart and intelligent species would also be aware of the interwoven and
interconnected nature of its existence with that of its environment. It
would not be so blind to the effects of its activities. This, in itself,
clearly shows we’re not there yet. Even some animals are more aware of
the environmental impact of their actions than we are.

The laws of nature have not changed. Water still flows to the sea; the
sun still rises in the east and wind still blows. But when did we become
so modern? When did our laws and contracts with the planet change to
such an extent that we can just do whatever we want with the land we
inherited? Yes, it’s a wise thing to remember we inherit the land, first
from our forefathers and second from our future generations. We are but
temporal stewards of this land and in the larger scheme of things, this
land is inherited from planet Earth itself.

Was it our science that made us so full of ourselves or when we realized
we could fly? When machines made it easier for us to do our work and we
felt like gods being able to manipulate the physical universe. Or
rather, the small physical corner of our reality. The universe is a vast
thing that we have little idea about. What’s funny is we know more about
the universe than we do about the depths of our oceans. Numerous ancient
civilisations and religions knew about the stars and plotted their
movement to accuracy. They even determined the circumference of the
earth through the stars. A feat we could not imagine accomplishing. Can
we still entertain the notion that we are modern?

![Several white arrows pointing upwards on a wooden wall](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1465343161283-c1959138ddaa?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwyfHxwcm9ncmVzc3xlbnwwfHx8fDE3Mzg0NjQ1Mjh8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Jungwoo Hong on Unsplash*

## The Price of Progress

Eratosthenes, who lived in Alexandria calculated this value to a
precision of less than 5% from our current value by watching angle at
which the sun’s light fell. Aryabhata-I who lived in the 7^(th) century
BCE calculated the circumference of the Earth to a precision of 0.02%
from the current accepted value today. The details of these feats is
beyond the scope of this essay but the implications are hugely relevant.
Those we call ‘savage’ or ‘primitive’ people, we easily attribute
abilities to them that are inferior to our own. Showing that they could
achieve the same feats with nearly zero equipment as we do with our
fancy ‘modern’ equipment, gives us pause to realize that we may not be
the smartest collective to have existed on this planet—even that
assumption could be the sign of a foolish species, for ‘little knowledge
is a dangerous thing.’

As Neil Postman reminds us in his prescient work 'Technopoly', we've
moved through distinct stages in our relationship with technology—from
using tools to serve our cultural needs, to letting technology shape our
culture, to finally surrendering our culture to technology entirely.
We've shifted from wielding tools with purpose to being wielded by them,
often without noticing the transition. This technological wisdom we
pride ourselves on may be leading us further from the human wisdom that
sustained us for millennia.

If we look at the progress we have made then it does make us proud.
Achieving flight, the internet and so many modern technological
innovations that have made our lives easier. These are blessings in
themselves. But, let’s look at this closer by asking ourselves one very
important question:  
**Have these innovations empowered our collective humanity or taken us
away from it?**

The answer, sadly, is not what we wish it to be. We could live in naïve
optimism and say, ‘yes it has empowered us’ but if we look at the
reality of it, we would only be deluding ourselves with such an answer.
Firstly, a large part of these innovations are present in the minority
of the western ‘developed’, ‘first-world’—whatever that means for a
species that shares one planet. The comforts of life that money can buy
are present most where there is most money. The underdeveloped or the
‘developing’ ‘third-world’ still lives the way it has for generations,
although now it has more waste and trash to deal with and also internet
to distract itself. The benefits of modernity are not global, they are
exclusive and it seems they *must be earned*.

Have we made progress that has alleviated the suffering of our fellow
human being? Have we added to it? Does putting our fellow human in a
fancy house with modern amenities, in front of a shining screen on a
super comfortable chair equate to alleviating suffering? Or are we
simply trying to avoid this problem with the excuse of comfort. What is
underneath this disguise of modernity? Think about it.

When it comes to progress we are like foolish voters who bank on the
responsibility of their representative while avoiding as much
responsibility themselves. We are riding the waves of progress and proud
of the achievements of others, while we ourselves have contributed
nothing. A passive consumer adds to the economy but does not grow
themselves. Do we have a desire to contribute to human progress or to
contribute to economic progress? At the time of writing this, I do not
believe these two means meet the same ends anymore.

What I shudder to think of is what happens next. We’ve thrown out the
baby with the bathwater. In discarding all the things that hinder us
from being ‘our modern selves’ we have relegated a large amount of
wisdom to dark corners. What essential wisdom have we thrown out in this
delusion of modernity? We think science can explain it all, our
governments can handle it all and we, with our technology, can solve it
all. When the rude awakening comes that all this is not true, will we
wake up? To be fair this is not a criticism of modernity but rather of
the implicit arrogance present in mankind. Each civilisation has lived
as if they were the best. History has historically been written by the
winner and in any society, we only knew what was true by what was told
to us. If we bothered to research it ourselves, we might come across a
wholly different truth. The error we have largely committed as a
collective species, one that I think we are destined to commit again, is
not of oversight but of under-sight. Of not seeing the larger
perspective but being bound by our immediate environment and believing
that is the extent of truth and of the world.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="You are the history of humanity itself." author="Jiddu Krishnamurti" %}

Are we going to slip farther into decadence because all our comforts
have ceased to challenge us? We can of course have discussions about
what is right and what is wrong, what is the meaning of life and how
does one live it. But all that is irrelevant if we don’t ask ourselves
this one question: Who are we?  
There is no short answer to this question.

![dome cathedral](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1492000984364-f025f4ea856a?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwxNXx8YW5jaWVudHxlbnwwfHx8fDE3Mzg0MTQ2MjV8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Amisha Nakhwa on Unsplash*

## Remembering Our Heritage

Walter Benjamin spoke of what he called '*Jetztzeit*'—a kind of
'now-time' where past and present collapse into each other, where
history isn't a string of beads we count but a big jewel we hold up to
the light, seeing all its facets at once. We don't just remember
history; we embody it. Each moment contains all moments, each of us
contains all of us—we are our ancestors, their hopes and fears and
wisdom still alive in our cells, their stories still whispering in our
dreams.

So, we need to think of the ancient heritage we all carry. That in some
way, we are all descendants of the greats. We carry the history of our
people inside us, in our very actions and in our beliefs, in the
smallest of our behaviours and the keenest of observations. Their
unfinished work is our work. We are not just people in the modern era.
We are the story of humanity. The condensed collective version of all
that has happened before us and in some way, all that might happen after
us. We are tasked to mend the past and look after the future. All the
wisdom accrued over generations has served a larger purpose to remind us
of who we are and what we are doing here. Often it’s not as simple as
instructions or commandments. We must search for this wisdom in our
personal and collective pasts.

The age of information technology has been confused with the modernity
that was promised to us. Have skyscrapers made us any closer to reaching
God or further away from it? Has our Wi-Fi and ‘always connected’
lifestyle served to connect us more to the world or has it disconnected
us more from each other and ourselves? Has our ‘always on the move’
jet-setter lifestyle given us the mobility and freedom we always craved
or has it trapped us in an illusion of freedom where we feel stuck in
our desires?

The answers to all these questions can be summarized thus: *we are
human*. We are not the last evolution of mankind. We have made mistakes
before, we are making mistakes now and we will make them again. Doing
things perfectly never made us human, but making mistakes with a smile
on our face did. Loving each other in a common acceptance and feeling of
collective origin—that made us human.

There are so many things that indeed made us human and these are the
things we are tasked to rediscover in this modern era. We are not to
take the current state of this world lying down or sitting in that
comfortable chair in front of the TV or our computers. Giving a shit
about the world means nothing if we don’t actively give a shit. That
means caring and getting out there to spread love in any form, not
merely trying to save the world. Rather, it is an attempt to save those
we love from destroying themselves.

If we call ourselves modern then we better update that definition and
call ourselves **Modern Ancients**. The slates do not get wiped clean
and natural evolution isn’t the same as technological progress. We are a
species developing for centuries and millennia. We carry the burden from
the past, things we need to address and fix. If not, then we pass on a
greater burden to our children, to those who follow. And in the spirit
of love that is wholly human, this is not a burden that feels right to
pass on. For if we do, what are we doing with our lives? Simply
consuming and chewing all that ‘good stuff’ that we get to enjoy in this
generation?

There is a give and take in this world, whether it’s between human
beings or unseen forces of nature and spirit. We don’t just exist, we
live. That is sometimes a task and sometimes a privilege. If we ask
ourselves the right questions, we can determine which is which. We can
live our lives not in blind optimism or blind pessimism, but active
participation.

E.F. Schumacher, in his seminal work *'Small is Beautiful'*, spoke of
technology with a human face—development that serves people rather than
profits, progress that enriches rather than depletes. He understood that
true advancement is about building better relationships—with each other,
with our work, with our world. As we face our planetary crisis, his
wisdom becomes more relevant: we don't need grand technological
solutions as much as we need to rediscover appropriate scale, to
remember that bigger isn't always better, that progress isn't always
forward, that sometimes the most ‘modern’ thing we can do is to step
back and reconsider our direction.

Climate change is a manifestation of how we’ve gone wrong and the one
thing it asks of us — is that we work together as a collective. The path
to individual progress has run rampant and needs to be balanced. If we
can start to work together and work towards developing characteristics
that are wholly human, then we will have truly made progress. When we
can treat each other, kindly and with love, then we can extend that same
love and respect for the natural world that sustains us. What is highest
in the human race is the ability to love and love dissolves all
boundaries. We’re not loving each other right now, we’re not loving
nature right now. Anyone well-versed in loving knows there’s a
difference between saying it and showing it.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="I think... if it is true that there are as many minds as there are heads, then there are as many kinds of love as there are hearts." author="Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina" %}
