---
layout: post
title: "Why We See The Worst in Others"
date: 2025-09-05
categories: essays
reading_time: "8 minutes"
excerpt: "An exploration of psychological projection through Jung's lens—examining how we unconsciously cast our own disowned feelings onto others, the difference between projection and genuine empathy, and the path toward reclaiming these shadow aspects of ourselves."
---

## Unmasking Projection

I wonder why people project. Projection is central to understanding the
human psyche and the interesting ways our minds work. The renowned Swiss
psychiatrist Carl Jung shed significant light on this common human
experience. He described projection as an unconscious, or unknowing,
habit where we take parts of our own personality – often feelings,
desires, or traits we haven't recognised in ourselves – and see them as
belonging to other people or even objects. It’s as if our conscious
mind, the ego, tries to sidestep looking at these inner parts directly,
especially if they might make us uncomfortable or challenge the way we
usually see ourselves.

Do people project from a desire to label? Or do they do so from a desire
to pawn off their own experience onto another? Sometimes people cannot
feel their own sadness, or understand themselves by themselves. They
need the canvas of another human being to paint the forms and feelings
that swim in their consciousness. But the final part of this equation
rarely comes. All the judgements that are imposed onto this person are
not taken back as symptoms of the accuser.

These 'rogue feelings' are often what Jung termed the Shadow. The Shadow
represents the less known side of our personality, containing aspects we
might hide or not be aware of, often because society or our own
self-image finds them unacceptable. It's not as simple as calling it
'evil,' but rather about all the things within us we haven't owned or
accepted. Because it can be hard to see these traits in ourselves, we
unconsciously 'cast' this shadow onto others. For example, someone who
strongly criticises what they see as arrogance in others might be
unknowingly dealing with their own unacknowledged feelings of
superiority.

In this way, the world can become a mirror reflecting these disowned
parts of who we are. As Jung himself suggested, "*Everything that
irritates us about others can lead us to an understanding of
ourselves*."

## Projection, Reflection and Connection

This tendency to project is far more common than perhaps we realise, but
it begs the question: how unhealthy is this for a person’s
self-awareness? For a person to be aware of their own feelings, often
they must not have anyone to project them onto, or perhaps only onto a
silly object which seems so irrelevant that the person will eventually
take back their feelings into themselves.

The problem here is that projected feelings often are hard to
distinguish from genuine empathy. A crucial distinction must be made.
Empathy, at its core, is the capacity to understand and share the
feelings of another; it is to feel with them. While the Dutch term
*'medelijden'* (often translated as pity or compassion) literally
suggests 'suffering with,' true empathy, or *'inlevingsvermogen'* as
it's also termed in Dutch, goes beyond merely feeling sorry for someone.
It involves a resonance with the other's specific emotional state, an
attunement to their reality. Thus, empathetic feelings are responsive
and adapt to what the other person is genuinely experiencing.

But projected feelings are different. They often don’t vary in flavour.
For if the person doing the projecting is trying to unconsciously push
their feelings outward and continuously failing to recognise them as
their own, these projections will contain a repeated flavour. Imagine a
person who simply pities everyone around them, everyone they meet, and
their own suffering is eclipsed by this intense pity for anyone below
them (economically). Projections do not change based on the state of the
person suffering; they remain attuned to what the person doing the
projecting is unable to feel.

The care someone wants to give the whole world is a simple reminder for
this person to give care to themselves, which they often don’t do. The
harsh discipline someone levies on all those around him is a reminder
for this discipline to be applied to himself too. Someone treats
everyone’s feelings as fragile and breakable and that’s because they
harbour such fragility in themselves. A person who hates themselves (and
hates their parent) ends up finding faults in the whole world, wishing
things were a bit more ideal. The saying comes to mind, one which is
very apt in these descriptions: ‘if it smells like shit everywhere,
check under your nose.’

So you see, the whole game is about self-realisation, but that often
doesn’t come because most of us are too busy pointing fingers at someone
else. Judging them from our lenses, and in this way, we neither make a
connection with this person nor understand the depth of their suffering.
Our own pain, our own emotion stays hidden to us as a mask that the
other wears, but we regularly fail to realise that we are imagining a
mask of our own making. We are telling the person what they should feel,
and if we truly notice what that entails, we will realise it is a
feeling we deny to ourselves.

Paradoxically, such inaccessible feelings are the easiest to project,
for they carry little weight for our conscious minds. Subconsciously we
are burdened with these feelings, but to our regular everyday awareness,
we might as well feel lucky that we don’t have to bear the pain of such
emotion. It is a fascinating thing how we hide things from ourselves, by
ourselves.

## The Role of the Ego

I wonder if our mind does this purposely to create some kind of
protective barrier? Or does this happen as a consequence of something
else? Perhaps the latter is more likely. If we combine both of these
reasons, we will find that this protective barrier resembles the ego.

Indeed, the ego, as Jung understood it, is the centre of our conscious
mind—our sense of 'I' that we show to the world and how we see our daily
life. However, it’s important to remember that the ego is not the
complete picture of who we are—even though it pretends to be ‘the
whole’. The whole self, according to Jung, also includes the vast
unconscious mind. The ego often acts like a manager, trying to keep our
self-concept consistent and comfortable. This ego creates an image for
the person which includes permissible feelings and other feelings which
are not allowed, which do not fit this persona. So the ‘rogue feelings’
are pushed away into the subconscious where they stay.

The ego is an interface, a way for us to interact with our
environment—social, cultural, physical. The feelings it has pushed down
must be expressed and will be expressed, for the ego may hide them from
us, but it cannot remove them. So they come up as judgements, as ideas,
as rapid thoughts preventing us from falling asleep. Since they do not
fit in the ‘persona’ they will leak out as deficiencies in someone else,
as problems in the world and as inadequacies of one’s experience. So,
the feelings will come out, no matter what we do, but they will resist
our conscious awareness.

That is one of the main things we can do in identifying these
projections. But how do we begin this delicate work of identification?
It often starts with cultivating a habit of rigorous self-honesty and
asking ourselves incisive questions when we experience strong reactions
to others:

- Is my emotional response – be it anger, irritation, intense
  admiration, or pity – disproportionate to the actual situation or the
  person's actions?

- Do I find myself consistently attributing the same specific faults,
  virtues, or motives to different people in my life?

- Is there a pattern in the advice I give or the 'help' I feel compelled
  to offer, perhaps reflecting an unaddressed need or struggle within
  myself?

- Does this person or situation remind me intensely of unresolved issues
  from my past, or of characteristics I dislike (or secretly desire) in
  myself?

Jung also spoke of the **'hook'** in projection. We don't typically
project onto a complete blank slate. Often, the other person possesses a
slight trait, a faint reminder or suggestion of the quality that we then
unconsciously seize upon and magnify with the full force of our own
unacknowledged content. This 'hook' makes the projection stick, and
makes it more believable to our own ego, because there's a 'kernel of
truth' that our unconscious latches onto.

In the end, we are human beings delicately woven into a world that
wishes to be understood through us. We are part of the world and
intimately connected to each other through the human organism. No matter
how much the lies of individualism may push us away from each other, our
subconscious will always find a way to remind us of these facts.

As Jung is often quoted, "Your visions will become clear only when you
can look into your own heart. Who looks outside, dreams; who looks
inside, awakes."

So, all we need to do is to pay attention to our projections, to pay
heed to the way we see the world. To try and decipher what colour we are
painting the world and then ask ourselves why. Our unique flavour of
viewing the world is a key and an important part of understanding
ourselves.

This journey of getting honest with ourselves, of withdrawing our
projections and integrating these disowned parts, is at the heart of
what Jung called individuation. Individuation is the lifelong process of
becoming the unique, whole, and authentic individual one is meant to be.
It involves differentiating oneself from the collective while also
embracing the fullness of one's own being – including the shadow. By
paying attention to what we cast out onto the world, we gather the lost
pieces of ourselves, moving towards a more complete and conscious
existence.  

The more we can get closer to ourselves and honest with ourselves, the
more we engender the same kind of change in the world. What if it’s
worth it?
