---
layout: post
title: "Money Greed And The Human Pursuit Of Survival"
date: 2025-08-28
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: ""
---

"For the love of money is the root of all kinds of evil. And some
people, craving money, have wandered from the true faith and pierced
themselves with many sorrows." – Timothy 6:10

## The Primal Drive: From Survival to Status

I wonder why people run after money so much. The kind of desperation and
envy they show towards this abstract concept of wealth really has me
baffled. Having money or not having money did not affect my sensual
experience of the world. Not having money **at all** did affect it
because of hunger, malnutrition etc.

In today’s world, it is such that the basic things of the world have
been designed to cost something. But in the economy, the basics are
supposed to be the cheapest. One can’t have electronics be cheaper than
food. So this makes money important in order to survive—but modern
humans are unable to calculate how much.

The instinct to hoard is very present in the modern day in the form of
digital currency. This instinct isn’t new but rather a common theme
across generations and millennia of humans. The desire for people back
in the day to hoard seashells, fine fabric, inert useless metals such as
gold and silver, has always come from a survival stand point—but morphed
into greed for resources.

It makes sense, humans fear dying and naturally want to survive and this
makes them chase whatever avenue there is to increase their chances of
survival. But most humans are bad at math. How many seashells do you
need to ensure your survival? How many days will you live? What will the
weather be on most days? What about the storms, the floods, the wars?
What if I need to bribe an invading army? It is in such cases where fear
for one’s life comes in that a human being starts hoarding, preparing
for a catastrophic eventuality that only exists in their mind.

"Money is only a tool. It will take you wherever you wish, but it will
not replace you as the driver." - Ayn Rand

Erich Fromm, in his book "*Escape from Freedom,*" argues that greed is
often a response to existential anxiety and the fear of insignificance.
Fromm suggests that individuals may accumulate wealth as a way to assert
their existence and gain a sense of security and control. However, this
perspective can be countered by this question: Can greed exist without
fear?

Initially, I said no it cannot but then another scenario emerged. Greed
can exist with ambition. A desire for power or status can be used to
fuel actions that end up in greed—for these things do not have an end.
Greed driven by the desire for achievement is clearly showcased in many
of today’s entrepreneurial narratives. There isn’t really an end-state
of enough achievement, enough power or enough status. One always wants
more. And then the trap is set for greed, covetousness, manipulation and
other underhanded techniques to get that power or status.

The modern day situation hasn’t changed much but money has become both a
symbol of power and an indicator of status. The two things most people
want in the world now converge into one thing, almost endowing it with a
godlike quality of omnipotence. With money one can do anything! Achieve
anything, buy anything, be anyone. Oh, the average mind just drools with
possibilities.

## The Power Paradox: Wealth and its Anxieties

The desire for money has evolved from a survival need to a symbol of
power and status. If we view this evolution through the lens of
psychological and sociological theories then Thorstein Veblen’s work
comes up. In "*The Theory of the Leisure Class*" he discusses the
concept of conspicuous consumption, where individuals display their
wealth as a means of demonstrating their social status. Veblen argues
that this behaviour is driven by a desire to gain respect and envy from
others.

Veblen's insight is incisive in how he connects economic behaviour to
primal social and psychological drives. The leisure class, as he calls
the rich, doesn't simply spend to fulfil material needs—they engage in
elaborate displays of "wasteful" consumption precisely because it
signals their ability to engage in non-productive activities. The more
removed an item or activity is from practical necessity, the more
effectively it serves as a status marker.

This creates a peculiar dynamic where objects gain value not through
their utility, but through their very impracticality. Think of elaborate
formal dining customs, or fashion items that prioritize form over
function. The leisure class cultivates tastes and habits that are
deliberately inefficient because efficiency would suggest the
constraints of productive work.

If we were able to look into the lives of ultra-rich people who have far
too much money that they cannot spend it in one lifetime, we would see a
deep-seated anxiety. The more one has, the more they are afraid to lose
it. The paranoia that accompanies this amount of wealth spreads to all
aspects of one’s life.

Such a person cannot always trust members of their own family for they
may be covetously eyeing some portion of their wealth. Friendships
always come with a hint of favours and this person never knows who’s
genuine and who is using them for their wealth. Love, similarly, is
fraught with questions such as “Do they love me or my money?”
Historically people in power, such as aristocrats, nobles, relations of
royalty always had this “problem”. Far from being an issue it has become
a question of assessing and analysis.

Max Weber, In "*The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,*"
argues that the pursuit of wealth can also be seen as a moral
obligation, a duty to increase one's wealth as a sign of virtue and
divine blessing. This perspective adds a diverse dimension to our notion
that the desire for money is solely rooted in negative emotions like
fear or greed. Weber observed that Protestant denominations,
particularly Calvinists, viewed worldly success as a sign of God's
favour and predestination, transforming the accumulation of wealth from
a potential sin into a religious duty. This theological justification
for wealth accumulation helped shape modern capitalism's ethical
framework.

The envy that people feel towards others who have money is often
misplaced. Why is there any reason to be jealous of someone who has more
resources than you? Maybe because one assumes their life is better—as
seen from the outside. Maybe the power they exert on you is wearing you
down and you want to exert it on them too. Eventually it comes down to
this desire for omnipotence. One wants to be free, to have pleasure, to
have leisure and we all mistakenly think money can offer us this.

In the modern day, business rules the time of most humans—no matter how
wealthy or poor. The rule of business is one has to keep at it. People
who have made their wealth from business activities are afraid to lose
it and so must keep the business going. They have people to manage,
funds to secure, meetings to attend to and countries to visit—albeit in
business or first class. A person, no matter how wealthy, who must serve
the demands of a system continually is trapped in the system. It is like
a lion that eats all their time. The need to engage in such activities
comes from a self-preserving instinct and in this case they must
preserve their wealth.

What has been true for centuries still holds true now. Money cannot buy
happiness, even if it can rid us of some forms of unhappiness (studies
show money does increase happiness but with diminishing returns after
basic needs are met). Money cannot buy love but it can buy moments where
people might fake love with you. Money cannot buy health but it can
offer more opportunities to heal and manage ill-health. And lastly, but
most importantly, no amount of money bought a second of time.

## The Inequality Machine: System and Society

On the question of leisure, yes a wealthy person might have more time
than a labourer who toils for most of their day but are they really? In
"The Wealth of Nations," Adam Smith discusses the division of labour and
the economic systems that govern society. Smith argues that while wealth
can provide certain freedoms, it also comes with responsibilities and
obligations and doesn’t necessarily lead to greater leisure or freedom.

But there are vast disparities in leisure time and work conditions
between different socioeconomic classes. This inequality shows up in how
people in lower strata must fight for basic things like housing, clean
food and water which the upper strata can easily take for granted. Here
again the question of ease of survival comes up again and the ambitions
of people to move up the social ladder are completely justified.

We must address the growing wealth gap that has become a pressing issue
in contemporary society. According to [a recent report by
Oxfam](https://www.oxfam.org/en/takers-not-makers-unjust-poverty-and-unearned-wealth-colonialism),
while nearly 5 billion people have grown poorer since 2020, the five
richest men in the world have doubled their fortunes to $869
billion—that's a staggering rate of $14 million per hour. Billionaire
wealth surged in 2024, with the combined wealth of the world's richest
increasing from $13 trillion to $15 trillion in just 12 months. This
marks the second-largest annual increase in billionaire wealth since
Oxfam began keeping records. The report also notes that the number of
people living in poverty has barely changed since 1990

This stark inequality highlights the systemic issues that perpetuate the
desire for money and the illusion of omnipotence it offers. The
concentration of wealth in the hands of a few not only exacerbates
social and economic disparities but also fuels the misplaced envy and
desperation that many feel towards the ultra-rich.

Economist Thomas Piketty, in his seminal work "*Capital in the
Twenty-First Century*," argues that the trend of increasing wealth
inequality is not a accident but a feature of capitalism itself.
Piketty's research shows that the return on capital tends to be higher
than the rate of economic growth, leading to a concentration of wealth
over time. This perspective challenges the notion that wealth trickles
down to benefit all layers of society and instead suggests that the
system is rigged in favour of those who already have capital.

The social implications of wealth inequality are profound. Studies have
shown that countries with higher levels of income inequality tend to
have lower levels of social mobility, poorer health outcomes, and higher
rates of crime. These issues are not just economic but also moral and
political, raising questions about fairness, opportunity, and the role
of government in redistributing wealth. The desire for money, in this
context, is not just about individual ambition but also about systemic
forces that perpetuate inequality.

## Being Versus Having: Rediscovering What Matters

"The price of anything is the amount of life you exchange for it." –
Henry David Thoreau

As we draw towards a conclusion we must think of the freedom and leisure
we think money can provide.

Is not leisure the ability to decide what to do with one’s time? This
ability to decide what to do with one's time relates to Aristotle's
concept of *eudaimonia*, or human flourishing. In his "*Nicomachean
Ethics*," Aristotle argues that true happiness comes from living a life
of virtue and excellence, not from the pursuit of wealth or pleasure.
This perspective suggests that true leisure is not merely the absence of
work but the freedom to engage in activities that are meaningful and
fulfilling.

Money is something we get after we do something of value to the economy.
But why do we do anything? Getting money or gaining wealth are not
meaningful activities in and of themselves—at least, that’s what I
believe. There needs to be a deeper intention, like that of the
protestant ethic we mentioned earlier. Duty, providing for a family,
earning to fund our hobbies are some examples of **why** people engage
in earning money. These intentions, that form the basis for our actions,
are usually engaged with the process of living.

To engage in earning money just to earn money is an empty shell and even
though this shell may be golden, it is devoid of a life-affirming
intention. Meaning and fulfilment come from engaging in these intentions
over a long period of time and while money can facilitate this process—a
means to an end—it should never become the end.

Immanuel Kant, in his "Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals,"
discusses the concept of moral worth and argues that true happiness
comes from acting in accordance with moral duty, not from external
circumstances like wealth. This could make us rethink the assumption
that those with more money necessarily have better lives.

A good life is spent doing what one loves, with those one loves. Let us
not fall into the trap of choosing financial security over our loved
ones. For no one, on their death bed, wished they had more money or that
they worked harder. They wish for those times with their children, with
their parents and those leisurely times spent in nature or just *being*.
We associate so much with doing that we forget being is the basis for
all that we do. *If we **were** not, we could not **do**.*

So we arrive at the end of our exploration on money without any answers
but hopefully more informed at this complex and nuanced issue. Of
course, this affects everyone differently and I only attempted to offer
a general and broad but varied and rich view. In the end, I hope we
remember that money is not the root of all evil, nor the answer to all
our problems—it is simply a tool and we should get better at
understanding it and using it as such.
