---
layout: post
title: "Nature And Our Connection To All Of Life"
date: 2025-08-29
categories: [essays, beauty, consciousness]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay explores our deep, often forgotten, connection to the natural world. It questions the modern illusion of separation from nature, arguing that our well-being is intrinsically linked to the health of the planet. Drawing on indigenous wisdom and scientific insights, it calls for a renewed sense of kinship with all life."
---


{% include pull-quote.html quote="I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front
only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it
had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not
lived." author="Henry David Thoreau" %}

Somehow our connection to nature and our continual search for meaning
are tied together at the root.

The other day, I saw my grandmother raise her hands at the sun. The
morning light bathing her small body in a golden orange hue as she
closed her eyes facing the sun just risen behind the mountain. She then
proceeded to offer water from a glass in its general direction.

Watching this beyond a window, conflicting thoughts entered my head. If
we just think of the sun as a passive star, a glowing hot ball of
radiation, then we'd find this act silly. But in my mind, I saw her
alternative as well: the sun was a God that gave unconditionally. She
told me later, "It gives us light and its rays do everything for us. I
can do nothing for it, except give it water."

This act seemed to me a more wholesome way of looking at everything.
Knowledge and science have made us knowledgeable but not necessarily
kinder or more reverent. If science replaced religion, it did not have
the effect religion once had. Quite the opposite—it freed us from dogma
but also from any kind of mystery and wonder about the universe and
life. Despite the fact that science provided us much more enriching and
nuanced ways of looking at the world than religion did.

This, I believe science did not intend. If we look at science done with
wonder in mind, we see discoveries that can enrich our understanding of
the world. Wonder is neither a function of science nor religion, nor any
discipline or field of study—it is a function of a mind and heart that
are open to experience and to curiosity.

In these simple acts of reverence, we find echoes of an older wisdom—one
that saw the sacred in the scientific, the miraculous in the mundane. In
his book "The Spell of the Sensuous," Abram writes, "Our most immediate
experience of the world around us is necessarily an experience of its
aliveness.... We directly experience things—stones, plants, clouds, as
living beings only when we experience ourselves as a part of them, or
when we feel ourselves as implicated in their experience." Abram's work
suggests that a re-enchantment of the world is possible through a
embodied and sensorial engagement with nature.

Rachel Carson understood this marriage of wonder and knowledge when she
wrote about basic processes in nature that may evoke wonder in us if we
looked at them carefully. I will share most of the following as direct
quotations as her writing is far too beautiful to need any rephrasing:

The Liver (Quote from “Silent Spring”):

"Of all organs in the body the liver is most extraordinary. In its
versatility and in the indispensable nature of its functions, it has no
equal. It presides over so many vital activities that even the slightest

damage to it is fraught with serious consequences.”  
The liver performs a multitude of functions essential to life. It
processes nutrients absorbed from the small intestine, produces bile to
aid in digestion, and plays a crucial role in metabolism,
detoxification, and immune response. The liver's ability to regenerate
itself is one of the most remarkable examples of regeneration in the
animal kingdom. This organ, so vital to our survival, is a testament to
the intricate and awe-inspiring design of nature.

Photosynthesis (from "The Sea Around Us"):

"The process of photosynthesis is one of the true miracles of life on
earth. It is the means by which green plants utilize the energy of
sunlight to build up carbohydrates from the simple raw materials of
carbon dioxide and water. In this way, the energy of the sun is captured
and stored in a form that can be used by living organisms. The
chlorophyll-bearing plants are the primary producers of the organic
world, and from them have come, directly or indirectly, the substances
that feed all animals. The process of photosynthesis is the basic source
of life; without it, the world as we know it could not exist."

The Water Cycle (from "The Sea Around Us"):

"The water cycle is a vast and never-ending circulation that involves
the whole earth and its atmosphere. Water evaporates from the ocean,
forms clouds, and returns to the earth as rain or snow. It flows in
rivers, gathers in lakes, seeps into the ground, and eventually finds
its way back to the sea. This cycle is essential to all life, for water
is the universal solvent, the medium in which all the complex chemical
reactions of life take place. The hydrologic cycle is a unifying force,
linking the sea with the land and the air, and maintaining the delicate
balance of life on our planet."

If we truly look at all this, we may be humbled and find that nature’s
intricate design is not too far from magic itself. How all these things
happen and continue to happen and sustain themselves is beyond the scope
of any discussion or explanation. We may understand parts of it but the
whole will be a mystery and I believe it is good that way—it offer us
something to imagine, something to wonder about.

These intricate dances of life—from the liver's quiet wisdom to water's
eternal cycle—pulse with the very heartbeat of our planet itself. The
Schumann resonance of 7.83 Hz is also called the Earth's heartbeat. It
is a low-frequency electromagnetic wave that circles the planet, created
by lightning and thunderstorms. The Gaia hypothesis, proposed by James
Lovelock, suggests that Earth's biological systems and the planet itself
work together as a single entity, with negative feedback loops that keep
conditions favourable for life.

As Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, "Nature always wears the colours of
the spirit." This spiritual colouring of nature reflects back to us a
deeper truth about our own essence. We look at ourselves as bodies that
just revolve around work and are made up of skin, bones, fluids, and
gas. Where has the mystical element of life gone? In our pursuit of
knowing everything, we've discarded the mystery of life that once
enriched us with mysticism and magic.

“One way to open your eyes is to ask yourself, “What if I had never seen
this before? What if I knew I would never see it again?” – Rachel Carson

In ancient days, people determined which stars were stars and which were
planets merely by looking at the night sky. They used their eyes to see
into the darkness beyond the limits of our natural world and gazed into
the supernatural. We don't use our eyes to see anything other than our
screens anymore. Life slowly seems to escape us, and we pretend not to
notice. This disconnection from wonder stems not from a failure of
knowledge, but from a fracture between our thinking and feeling selves.

Our minds seem to turn away from information, ideas, or perspectives
that contradict our sense of identity. Most of us don't look where we're
told not to look. If you call something 'new-age spirituality,' then
most people who don’t identify themselves with this idea will refuse to
even examine the contents of its message. It's just easily regarded as
pseudo-bullshit. Similarly, there are many reasons why ecology is
deteriorating and climate change is getting worse—and one of them is
because we're collectively refusing to look.

Just as the water cycle knows no true boundaries, our essence flows
beyond the artificial borders of skin and self. Our identity isn’t
simply our body, ideas, and ego, but there's more to us than that. We
have a soul, and we can pretend to not know it, but deep down, I think
we do. Let's also not give our soul a characteristic of
individualism—our bodies are in 'the soul.' We're all swimming in its
vastness, and it's part of the reason we're all connected. Our identity
is far greater than we think.

But we think and this act of thinking often seems to be a merely
superficial one. Overthinking is almost always thinking disconnected
from feeling. If thinking is limited to the horizontal, the flat, the
wide then feeling is the vertical dimension of the same thing, the
height, the depth. To go higher or deeper in our understanding, we must
understand what we're feeling. And we're not sure what we're feeling;
we're too busy, we're too afraid, we're too pre-occupied with bullshit
peddled to us by media sources to even think beyond fear, anger,
entertainment and confusion.

The world is not going in a nice direction. It isn't some pseudoscience
of future prediction; we need only look at the present and realize: if
things keep going this way, it's not going to end well. Is there going
to be some magic pill that will solve everything? Is some saviour going
to emerge from an unknown village and be the cure to all the ills? I'm
afraid, if we believe that, we're putting our eggs in the wrong basket.
There is a saviour in all of us. We are all that magic pill. And so, it
is our task to find what our soul is trying to tell us and heal the
world in the small, unnoticeable ways we can.

In this cacophony of crisis, perhaps what we need most is silence—a
space to reconnect with that which we've forgotten. As Pablo Neruda
wrote in his poem "Keeping Quiet":

"Now we will count to twelve

and we will all keep still.

This one time upon the earth,

let's not speak any language,

let's stop for one second,

and not move our arms so much."

This stillness might reveal what our constant motion conceals—that our
economic systems mirror our inner fragmentation. Who cares about the
world or the soul, right? We should just be busy making our money,
looking at our screens, maintaining our status and power, keeping
ourselves busy, and the problem will solve itself. As George Monbiot
wrote in The Guardian, "Our economic model is incompatible with the
survival of life on Earth." This sentiment echoes the urgency of our
situation and the need for a shift in our priorities.

From "PMC":

"Even if capitalism, as the dominant economic model, incorporates
natural capital into its cost–benefit analysis, nature still loses out;
unlimited human growth—the central tenet of capitalism—and sustainable
development are incompatible. The scientific community has been highly
sensitive to this alarming development and increased the number of
baseline and ecological studies on the impact of humans on the biosphere
and proposed various strategies to alleviate the environmental and
biotic crisis."

From "Monthly Review":

"The social relation of capital, as we all know, is a contradictory one.
These contradictions, though stemming from capitalism’s internal laws of
motion, extend out to phenomena that are usually considered external to
the economy. Marx’s analysis of primitive accumulation pointed to the
separation of workers from the land as the formative contradiction of
capitalism. His critique of political economy highlighted the
commodification of all of life and the dominant role played by
accumulation without end, rooted in exchange value as opposed to use
value. One of the key elements in Marx’s ecological analysis is his
theory of metabolic rift. Marx employed the concept of a rift in the
metabolic relation between human beings and the earth to capture the
material estrangement of human beings within capitalist society from the
natural conditions that formed the basis for their existence."

From "illuminem":

"The ecological principle ‘nature knows best’ does not work, but rather
the anti-ecological principle ‘self-regulating market knows best’
increasingly controls all life under capitalism. For example, food is no
longer perceived primarily as a source of nutrition, but as a means of
making a profit, so the nutritional value of products is sacrificed in
volume. This tendency of ‘commercial capitalism’ to simplify, as the
Indian physicist and environmentalist Vandana Shiva notes, ‘is based on
the specialized production of goods. The typicality of production
requires the one-sided use of natural resources.’"

These systemic failures ripple through both human society and natural
systems, creating a web of interconnected crises. Not to mention that
natural disasters often set the stage for sociopolitical problems. For
example, the driest periods have coincided with periods of political
unrest in China, according to a recent study spanning thousands of years
of precipitation data, establishing a historical link between climatic
stress and social chaos. Given the growing global concerns about climate
change, it is crucial to understand historical and current changes in
drought and water cycles.

Last year's record-breaking temperatures could be a sign that the world
is entering a new era above 1.5C of global warming, scientists say, one
never before faced by modern humans. The Paris Agreement threshold of
1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels is a small-sounding
number with big implications for people and nature.

With all these changes going on, it is not a surprise that the movement
to correct the ill-effects of climate change is popular among the youth.
The people who will depart this planet within the next 50 years don't
seem to care all that much. And I get that, but does that really help
anyone?

{% include pull-quote.html quote="The more clearly we can focus our attention on the wonders and
realities of the universe about us, the less taste we shall have for
destruction. Wonder and humility are wholesome emotions, and they do not
exist side by side with a lust for destruction." author="Rachel Carson" %}

We may want to reawaken that reverence that once existed in all our
cultures. We may want to start seeing the sun as a light-giving entity,
imbued with a pure soul that keeps giving—maybe we want to give it some
water in the morning to quench its thirst? The question is not whether
to pursue these acts; it is to revive what they represented: **our
participation in a world that's alive**. Our actions then say to the
world, "Yes, I want to keep you alive as well." Right now, it's not too
much of a stretch to say we're killing the world and with it our
collective selves.

The winds, the sea, and the moving tides are what they are. If there is
wonder and beauty and majesty in them, science will discover these
qualities. If they are not there, science cannot create them. If there
is poetry in my book about the sea, it is not because I deliberately put
it there, but because no one could write truthfully about the sea and
leave out the poetry.

— Rachel Carson; Address upon receiving National Book Award at
reception,

Even death as the necessary promoter of life is a wonder in itself. And
as we know, but don’t often admit, all life ends in death. The pessimist
in me says: ‘Maybe this was the way we were supposed to go.’ But the
realist in me chooses to believe there is a greater understanding that
guides us and life on this planet. If this is the way it is meant to go,
then so be it. Folly might be the scripture mankind has yet to read and
understand. Maybe this is the process towards something good. Like the
storms, we see as the wrath of the Gods, this too may be a storm passing
through our souls. Like all storms, it won't last forever—and neither
will we.

Let's reawaken our reverence for nature and our connection to all life.
Let's start seeing the world as alive and participate in its aliveness.
To conclude I will leave you with one of my favorite poems "Wild Geese"
by Mary Oliver:

"You do not have to be good.

You do not have to walk on your knees

for a hundred miles through the desert repenting.

You only have to let the soft animal of your body

love what it loves.

Tell me about despair, yours, and I will tell you mine.

Meanwhile the world goes on.

Meanwhile the sun and the clear pebbles of the rain

are moving across the landscapes,

over the prairies and the deep trees,

the mountains and the rivers.

Meanwhile the wild geese, high in the clean blue air,

are heading home again.

Whoever you are, no matter how lonely,

the world offers itself to your imagination,

calls to you like the wild geese, harsh and exciting

over and over announcing your place

in the family of things."
