---
layout: post
title: "Do We Only Think About Ourselves"
date: 2025-09-06
categories: essays
reading_time: "12 minutes"
excerpt: "A contemplation on self-absorption and consciousness—exploring the psychology behind our natural self-focus, from childhood egocentrism to adult patterns, and the delicate journey toward expanding awareness beyond our own reflection to genuinely see and connect with others."
---

I find it constantly surprising how much people talk about themselves or
refer to themselves in conversations. It seems like a kind of
consciousness where the self sits highest, next to God alone, almost on
a sacred altar where only their own image is allowed. They seem to think
only of themselves, their stories, their feelings, and then only about
others in terms of duties or usefulness—how another person fits into
their pre-written script or serves a purpose in their personal universe.

I wonder how much I think of myself, how often my own thoughts circle
back to my own experiences, or whether I actively try to stop it, try
not to give in to that pull. I remember talking about myself while
networking at events, making a conscious effort to share myself because,
well, one needs to talk about themselves otherwise people will not know
who they are talking to; it's a necessary dance of introduction. But
it’s like most people want this kind of attention, this constant
confirmation of their own story, in a way that just makes them feel
cringe to me—an overblown performance of self. I really don't know what
else to say about this because I just don't know that much, and perhaps
that's the heart of it—the less we know, the smaller our world, the
larger the self appears within it.

It is a matter of consciousness, and when it hasn't grown, when it
hasn't stretched beyond its first boundaries, the person sees only
themselves, and even the world they see, so rich and multifaceted, is
secondary, a mere backdrop to their own starring role.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="In the universe, there are things that are known, and things that are
unknown, and in between, there are doors." author="William Blake" %}

It's a strange human tendency, isn't it? This constant circling around
ourselves, as if each of us is a sun with our own planets of thoughts
and memories. We're all the heroes of our own stories, however ordinary
they might look from outside. Psychology even has a name for a related
mental quirk: the "**self-reference effect.**" It's a well-studied fact
that we tend to remember information much more clearly if we can somehow
link it back to ourselves. If a story about a distant land mentions a
type of tree that grew in our childhood garden, that detail will light
up the entire story for us. If a historical fact connects with a
personal struggle, it's carved into our memory.

So, in a way, our brains are wired to focus on the "me-show," to filter
experience through the lens of what matters to us personally. This isn't
necessarily bad; it's likely a tool from evolution, a mental shortcut
that helped our ancestors navigate and make sense of a complex and often
dangerous world by connecting it to their most immediate reference
point: themselves. But it does make you wonder where the line is, when
this natural tendency, this spotlight becomes a closed loop, a
conversation with ourselves even when others are trying to join in.

This intense focus on self has deep roots, starting when we're very
young. The famous developmental psychologist Jean Piaget noticed that
small children genuinely can't understand that others see the world
differently. It's a thinking stage where a child genuinely struggles to
understand that others have thoughts, feelings, and viewpoints different
from their own. If a child sees a toy they like, they might assume
everyone else sees it, wants it, and experiences it in exactly the same
way. If they are hiding and cover their own eyes, they might believe
that because they cannot see, no one can see them. It's a world filtered
almost completely through their own lens, a universe where their
perceptions are the absolute truth.

![The world through a child's perspective](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1483193722442-5422d99849bc?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwzfHxjaGlsZHxlbnwwfHx8fDE3NDgwMTI3NzN8MA&ixlib=rb-4.1.0&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Caleb Woods](https://unsplash.com/@calebjwoods) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

As we grow, we're supposed to develop what's called a "theory of mind" - the crucial understanding that others have their own independent mental states, their own beliefs, desires, intentions, and knowledge,
which may be completely different from our own. This is the foundation
of social interaction, the base upon which empathy and complex
relationships are built.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="Perhaps all the dragons in our lives are princesses who are only
waiting to see us act, just once, with beauty and courage. Perhaps
everything that frightens us is, in its deepest essence, something
helpless that wants our love." author="Rainer Maria Rilke" %}

Yet, echoes of this egocentrism can remain, sometimes quite loudly, into
teenage years and even adulthood, making me wonder if what I see in
others is an old pattern that never quite faded. David Elkind expanded
on this with his idea of "**adolescent egocentrism**," which brings two
rather uncomfortable ideas forward: the "**imaginary audience**" and the
"**personal fable.**"

The imaginary audience is that constant feeling that everyone is
watching you, examining your every move, your clothes, your words, every
small stumble and brief success. It's like living under a constant
spotlight, where every social interaction is a performance for a
critical, unseen crowd. This can be exhausting and, frankly, a bit
self-important, creating a kind of anxious self-awareness. This might be
where some of that 'cringe' factor comes in—that uncomfortable internal
squirm we feel when someone seems to be performing for invisible judges,
their every story polished for maximum personal shine, their laughter a
little too loud, their gestures a little too big, demanding a kind of
attention that feels... off, because it seems disconnected from a
genuine shared experience.

![The empty theater of our imaginary audience](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F3b4642e7-b33a-4070-b0f5-fd414a2aedee_1080x542.jpeg)
*Photo by [Andrew Seaman](https://unsplash.com/@amseaman) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

Then there's the personal fable. The deeply held belief that one's own
experiences, feelings, and thoughts are completely unique, so deep, so
intense, that no one else could possibly understand. “You just don't get
it!”, or “no one understands me” become repeated lines, a shield against
perceived misunderstanding, but also a barrier to true connection. While
a part of creating an identity, this sense of being special, if not
balanced with a broader understanding of shared human experience, can
lead to a deep sense of being alone, or worse, a dismissal of others'
experiences as somehow less valid or less important.

The journey of consciousness, as I first framed it, seems to involve a
gradual, and often difficult, moving away from this built-in egocentric
viewpoint. It's recognising that while our own experience feels bright,
immediate, and undeniably real to us, it's just one light among billions
of others, equally bright. Like realising your torch only lights a tiny
patch of an endless landscape. When this shift doesn't fully happen, or
when life circumstances—perhaps trauma, long-term stress, or even too
much praise without grounding—push a person back into a more
self-protective, self-focused mode, we might see this pattern. Their
interactions with others might then become mostly transactional, framed
by "duties or usefulness" what can this person do for me, how do they reflect on me, or what do I owe them in a way that serves my story,
rather than a genuine curiosity about who they are, what they feel, and
what the world looks like through their eyes.

There's a spectrum here, of course, a vast range between unhealthy
self-obsession and a complete lack of self-awareness. A healthy amount
of self-awareness, self-care, and self-compassion is vital—we need it to
care for ourselves, to be kind to ourselves when we stumble. This is the
kind of self-focus that empowers, that allows us to build strength, to
learn from our mistakes, and to engage with the world from a place of
authenticity. But when this crosses into an unhealthy fixation, when the
self becomes not a home base but a fortress, it can become problematic.
Constant negative self-talk, an overwhelming focus on one's perceived
flaws that stops action, or, on the flip side, an inflated sense of
self-importance that demands constant validation and accepts no
criticism (does this remind you of someone?). These are the darker sides
of self-focus. Some research even links excessive, particularly
negative, self-focused attention to conditions like depression and
anxiety, where people get stuck in a repeating loop of their own
thoughts and feelings, unable to easily shift their attention outward.
It's as if the "*me-show*" becomes a horror film playing on repeat, with
the self as both the suffering victim and the relentless tormentor, and
there is no way out.

It's this intense personal experience, this fundamental difficulty in
truly knowing what it's like outside our own heads—a point that almost
makes discussing it feel like grasping at smoke, trying to describe the
taste of water to someone who has never drunk—that philosophers have
taken to its most extreme conclusion with the concept of 'solipsism.'
It's the radical idea that one can only be certain of the existence of
one's own mind; everything else could theoretically be a creation of
one's imagination, an elaborate projection. While few people truly live
as solipsists (it would be an incredibly lonely existence), it's a
thought experiment that starkly shows the built-in privacy of our own
consciousness.

We can never directly experience another person's thoughts or feelings.
We guess, we empathise, we communicate through the imperfect tools of
language and gesture, but that direct, unfiltered access to another's
inner world is impossible. This fundamental separateness can be a source
of deep existential worry, a feeling of ultimate aloneness, or it can be
a starting point for a deeper appreciation of the effort, the courage,
and the sheer miracle it takes to truly connect with another being
across that invisible gap.

So, if we're all somewhat wired for self-reference, and if egocentrism
is a developmental hurdle we all face, how does one develop a
consciousness that genuinely sees and values others beyond their
usefulness to the self, beyond their role as supporting characters in
our personal drama?

![Breaking free from self-centered perspectives](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F55e918a4-613d-489d-b76c-de48074da66f_1080x765.jpeg)
*Photo by [Nathan Dumlao](https://unsplash.com/@nate_dumlao) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

This is where concepts like "decentering" and "empathy" become so
crucial, acting as counterweights to our built-in self-focus.
Decentering, in a psychological sense, is the ability to step back from
our own thoughts and emotions, to observe them with some distance,
without necessarily identifying with them or being swept away by them.
It's a skill of thinking about thinking—thinking about our thinking,
feeling about our feelings. Mindfulness practices, for example, often
aim to develop this ability by encouraging us to notice thoughts as they
come and go, like clouds in the sky, rather than as unchangeable truths
or urgent commands. By creating a little space between ourselves and our
internal monologue, we can react less, gain a broader view, and choose
our responses more consciously. We might realise that a thought is just
a thought, a passing mental event, not an absolute truth, and that a
feeling, however intense, will eventually pass or change.

Empathy, then, is the bridge we build from our own decentered awareness
to the experience of another. It's more than just sympathy (feeling
sorry for someone, which can still keep a sense of separation or even
superiority); it's the attempt to understand and even share the feelings
of another person from their perspective, to imaginatively live in their
world for a moment. There's cognitive empathy: the intellectual exercise
of understanding what someone else might be thinking or feeling, like
figuring out a map of their internal landscape. And there's emotional
empathy: actually feeling an echo with their emotional state, a faint
reflection of their joy or sorrow in our own being.

Building empathy isn't always easy; it's an active, ongoing practice. It
requires active listening and not just waiting for our turn to speak.
It’s truly hearing what is being said and what is left unsaid. It means
paying attention not just to words but to body language, tone of voice,
and the subtle signs that reveal inner states. It means challenging our
own biases and assumptions, those pre-formed ideas that can colour our
view of others. And it demands genuine curiosity about others, asking
questions not to gather information for our own story, or to confirm our
own theories, but to truly learn about theirs, to understand their
unique story.

![The journey of connection and empathy](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1451471016731-e963a8588be8?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwyfHxlbXBhdGh5fGVufDB8fHx8MTc0Nzk5ODk3OHww&ixlib=rb-4.1.0&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Annie Spratt](https://unsplash.com/@anniespratt) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

Perhaps the most important shift in consciousness, the true marker of
its growth, is the move from a default setting of "What does this mean
for me?" to "What might this mean for them?" or even, more broadly,
"What does this mean for us?" It's an expansion of the circle of
concern, from the self, to the family, to the community, to the wider
world. It doesn't mean erasing the self or becoming a selfless martyr; a
healthy sense of self, a well-tended inner garden, is the foundation
upon which genuine connection and contribution can be built. But it does
mean recognising that the self, however important, is not the whole
landscape, not the only flower in the garden.

The philosopher Iris Murdoch wrote beautifully about this, calling it
"unselfing" those moments when attention to something outside ourselves
(beauty, art, another person's reality) jolts us out of our
self-absorption. Instead of losing ourselves we find ourselves as part
of something larger, something that includes but transcends our
individual concerns.

The 'cringe' I feel when witnessing certain kinds of self-display, then,
might be an intuitive recognition of this imbalance. This performance
that seems to demand an oversized portion of the world's attention is
perhaps a sign, as I first wondered, of a consciousness that hasn't
quite 'grown' beyond that primary self-orbit, showing an underlying
insecurity or an unmet need for validation that hasn't found a
healthier, more integrated outlet. It's as if the person is stuck in
that "imaginary audience" phase, still believing the spotlight is
intensely on them, and acting accordingly, unaware that the rest of the
world is not, in fact, holding its breath for their next announcement.

Ultimately, navigating this tension between self and other, between our
inner world and the shared world, is a delicate, lifelong process. There
will be times when looking inward and self-focus are necessary and
healing, moments when we must retreat inside to recharge or heal. There
will be other times when the greatest growth, the deepest joy, comes
from turning our attention outward, from engaging with the world and its
people with genuine curiosity, compassion, and a willingness to be
changed by the encounter.

It's a living balance and while it's easy to observe the seemingly
endless self-reference in others, the more challenging, and perhaps more
rewarding, question remains the one I first asked myself: "I wonder how
much I think of myself or whether I try and stop it, try and not engage
in it." That very question, that moment of self-reflection armed with a
little more understanding, is perhaps the first, and maybe most crucial,
step towards a more expansive consciousness—a journey that, by its very
nature, likely never truly ends but continues to unfold with each
attempt to see beyond our own reflection, to listen more deeply, and to
connect more authentically. It's an acknowledgment that the self, while
central to our experience, doesn't have to be the sole occupant, or the
loudest voice, in the vast concert hall of our awareness.

![The path toward expanded consciousness](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1583848697106-f0339cbb6ab2?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw3fHxlbXBhdGh5fGVufDB8fHx8MTc0Nzk5ODk3OHww&ixlib=rb-4.1.0&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Clay Banks](https://unsplash.com/@claybanks) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*
