---
layout: post
title: "A History Of Yoga Part 2"
date: 2025-08-18
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: ""
---

Now that we’ve covered what yoga currently is, let’s discover what Yoga
was. To discover this however, we will need to dive a bit deeper into
ancient philosophies of Hinduism and how they influenced each other.

The origins of yoga are unclear but sources say it may have developed
among monks and ascetics in the first millennium BCE—it is only around
this time it is mentioned distinctly from Samkhya. Yoga philosophy is
believed to be first mentioned in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, the
oldest Upanishad, and researcher Gavin Flood, translates the experience
of union as, “...having become calm and concentrated, one perceives the
self (atman), within oneself.”

As mentioned in the previous essay, the path in which the mind is still
and the intellect does not waver is called Yoga.

The Yoga school of philosophy is one of the six major schools of Hindu
philosophy. The other five being: Samkhya, Nyaya (justice), Vaisheshika
(perception – inference), Mīmāṃsā (reflection) and Vedanta (conclusion
of the Vedas).

## The Nature of Reality

Samkhya philosophy believes in the duality of Purusha, consciousness or
witness-consciousness, and Prakriti, matter or nature. Prakriti and
Purusha come into contact with each other and the universe explodes into
the reality we are all very familiar with. The explosion, to be precise,
is into 23 aspects of reality or *tattvas*.

Some of these are intellect, ego, mind, ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose,
and the colliding factors that give rise to the five elements—earth,
air, fire, water and space. These range from the abstract to the
concrete. Just as your smartphone contains components from the processor
to the screen that work together to create your user experience, these
23 aspects combine to create our experience of reality. Essentially, the
experience of reality and the ability to think about that experience
emerges from the contact between purusha and prakriti. It is interesting
to note that Samkhya doesn’t explicitly believe in the existence of God.

In Indian philosophy, there were six proofs developed by which anyone
can discern truth. These are:

1.  **Pratyaksha (Perception):** What you experience directly through
    the senses, the most immediate and reliable source. Ex. The feeling
    of rain.

2.  **Anumana (Inference):** What you can logically reason and deduce
    based on the facts of your experience. Ex. Wet streets means it must
    have rained last night.

3.  **Upamana (Analogy):** What you can understand about reality by
    relating it to another aspect of reality.

4.  **Arthapatti (Postulation):** Based on the above, you can assume the
    existence of something, tangible or intangible, to clear up any
    confusion.

5.  **Anupalabdhi (Non-perception):** Knowing about something through
    its absence. If there’s no smoke, then there’s no fire; no trees,
    therefore no forest and so on…

6.  **Shabda (Reliable Testimony):** Lastly, if someone has already done
    all the above properly you should be able to take their word for
    it—this refers to enlightened beings as well as scriptures and of
    course, peer-reviewed journals.

While Samkhya accepts three of six proofs, namely direct perception,
inference and reliable testimony, some yoga schools accept all six.
Mostly it is the same three methods of proof that yoga uses too.

## The Eight-Fold Path (Ashtanga)

The yoga school of philosophy, in its essence, is nearly parallel to the
Samkhya school. In their fundamental views of Purush and Prakriti, their
acknowledgement of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), their
focus on liberation as the ultimate goal of practice and in the process
overcoming ignorance or *avidya*, they emerge from the same foundations
and aim towards the same goals. Where they diverge is the common
diversion between theory and practice.

While Samkhya lays the metaphysical framework, outlining the concepts
mentioned above. Yoga builds upon this foundation, offering practical
techniques and a systematic path to achieve the liberation described in
Samkhya.

Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras is one of the foundational sources for Yoga
philosophy, along with Sankara’s Brahmasūtrabhaśya. It was compiled in
the early years of this millennium as the
*Pātañjalayogaśāstra*—including a treatise of texts where many Indian
scholars of the time wrote their notes and commentary on it. So, in a
way, it was peer-reviewed.

The sutras mention the 8 limbs of Yoga, *ashtanga*. These are:

1.  **Yama (Abstinences or Restraints):** These are ethical things or
    acts one should resist or avoid.

2.  **Niyamas (Personal observances):** Ethical disciplines directed
    towards oneself

3.  **Asana (Posture):** Physical postures practiced in yoga (Postural
    Yoga). While modern yoga focuses heavily on asana, in the context of
    the 8 limbs, it's about finding a steady and comfortable seat for
    meditation.

4.  **Pranayama (Breath control):** This involves regulating the breath
    through various techniques to control prana (vital energy) and calm
    the mind.

5.  **Pratyahara (Sense withdrawal):** Withdrawing the senses from
    external distractions and turning inwards to one’s inner self or
    chosen deity.

6.  **Dharana (Concentration):** Collecting or focusing the mind on a
    single point or object.

7.  **Dhyana (Meditation):** This is a state of contemplation or
    continuous flow of consciousness towards the object of
    concentration.

8.  **Samadhi (Absorption or Stillness):** The final stage, a state of
    complete absorption where the individual consciousness merges with
    the universal consciousness. There are different kinds of Samadhi,
    some where a person can come back, some where they cannot.

Yoga philosophy says that the entanglement of Purusha with Prakriti is
the root cause of suffering (*dukkha*) and the cycle of birth and death
(*samsara*). Isn’t this starting to sound like Buddhism? And so, because
we persist on ignorance (*avidya*), our consciousness (*purusha*) starts
to confuse itself with matter (*prakriti*), mistaking the transient for
the eternal. This leads to attachment, aversion, and a continuous cycle
of desires and disappointments.

## The Modern Relevance of the Ancient 

It’s a welcome surprise that this issue was at the core of these
philosophies so many centuries ago. Problems that we assume have a
modern source, are more likely the perennial malady of the human being.
We have always desired, we have always suffered in attachment and we
have fluctuated in the spectrum of pleasure and disgust. In so many
ways, nothing has changed.

So, the goal (now and back then) is liberation from all this stuff that
weighs us down. Moksha, the holy grail of yoga practice, is the ultimate
aim. We are told it is like achieving a state of complete freedom and
self-realization. This liberation is not an escape from the world but
rather a shift in perspective, recognizing the true nature of the Self
(with a capital ‘S’) and allowing it to detach from the material realm.
But in all this, moksha does not wish to introduce more separation. Once
liberated, a being can understand the true nature of reality and how the
spiritual and material, like day and night, imply each other.

“The Supreme Good is mokṣha which consists in the permanent
impossibility of the incidence of pain... in the realisation of the Self
as Self pure and simple.” —*Samkhyakarika* I.3

What’s interesting here is the Samkhya version—it says that it is
actually Prakriti (matter) that binds itself to spirit and so it is not
to free consciousness (purusha) but to free matter itself.

“By seven modes nature binds herself by herself: by one, she releases
(herself), for the soul's wish” —*Samkhyakarika* Verse 63

Quite a fascinating take, for we so easily think it is this
consciousness trapped in the body but what if it is the other way
around? What if our body is trapped in this cycle of consciousness and
only slowly releasing itself through life eventually ending in death?
Something to reflect on, an idea that could offer a valuable shift of
perspective.

So to truly practice yoga, we can follow some principles. For our
ethical and moral concerns towards the outer world (*Yamas*): we should
avoid harming other beings; be honest and truthful; we shouldn’t steal;
we should act with integrity to our environment and social circumstance;
and finally we should not get attached to our possessions and not covet
others’ as well.

Some of these attitudes towards the external world sound very familiar
to those mentioned in the commandments of Christianity, or to
Confucianism and its emphasis on social harmony and ethical conduct.
They naturally share a common element with the Golden Rule, with the
precepts of Buddhism and even some elements of Mayan values and Aztec
philosophy. This is because we humans aren’t that different in the end.
We all do similarly petty things and societies have urged us to
transcend our lower natures and live in harmony with each other. These
fundamental human values do not belong to any religion or culture but to
humanity itself. Therefore, we must remember that this is why societies
have continued to exist and these values are what will help society
survive.

Some inner values we can attempt to adhere to (*Niyamas*) are:
attempting to be pure in our minds, speech and body; to be content with
oneself and with others, fostering a sense of acceptance of our
individual circumstances; to persevere and persist in our spiritual
practice; to study ourself, to reflect, introspect; and finally to
contemplate the True Self, the greater being, the thing above all things
that reminds one of a greater unity.

Pleasure and pain results from contact of soul, sense, mind and object.
Non-origination of that follows when the mind becomes steady in the
soul. After it, there is non-existence of pain in the embodied soul.
**This is that Yoga**.  
— *Vaiśeṣika Sūtra 5.2.15–5.2.16*

Adi Sankara, the 8th century scholar, described the Yoga school of
thought as “Samkhya school with God.” This addition of *Ishwara* (often
translated as 'divine consciousness' or 'universal spirit') transforms
yoga from pure philosophy into a living practice. While scholars have
debated Patanjali's exact meaning of *Ishwara*, its practical
significance is clear: it represents anything that inspires us to
transcend our limited sense of self.

This transcendence isn't about escaping reality but about seeing it more
clearly. As the Yoga Vasistha tells us, there are two paths to this
clarity – self-knowledge and the restraint of mental conditioning.
Modern yoga has largely focused on the latter, but both paths lead to
the same destination: a profound understanding of our true nature.

**Yoga is the utter transcendence of the mind**. To some, Self-knowledge
through inquiry is difficult, to others Yoga is difficult. But my
conviction is that the path of inquiry is easy for all, because
Self-knowledge is the ever-present truth.— *Vasistha to Rama, Yoga
Vasistha 6.1.12–13*

अथ योगानुशासनम् (atha yogānushāsanam) – ‘Here begins the instruction on
the practice of Yoga,’ writes Patanjali in the opening line of his Yoga
Sutras. These words, written millennia ago, still resonate today. They
remind us that yoga is not just an ancient philosophical system but a
living tradition that continues to evolve and transform. Whether through
physical postures, breath work, meditation, or philosophical inquiry,
yoga offers tools for understanding ourselves and our place in the
universe.

The journey from its ancient roots to its modern expressions shows us
that while methods may change, the essential quest remains the same: to
understand who we are beyond our limited identifications, to find peace
amid life's inevitable changes, and to realize our connection to
something greater than ourselves.

This understanding of yoga – as both an ancient wisdom tradition and a
living, breathing practice – invites us to engage with it not just as
exercise or philosophy, but as a comprehensive approach to living with
greater awareness and purpose. In this light, every aspect of yoga, from
its philosophical foundations to its practical applications, becomes a
doorway to a deeper understanding of ourselves and our world.

We can build towards a future without being attached to the fruits of
our actions. We can go through life without resorting to control or
frustration when things inevitably change. Not only can we overcome
challenging situations but also recognize our apparent smallness on the
universal scale. Our existential anxiety comes from being a blink in
eternity while yoga reminds us we are eternity as well.

I hope you enjoyed this two-part exposition on Yoga. Stay tuned for more
and please share this with someone who’d be interested in reading this
too.
