---
layout: post
title: "The Pursuit of Love Through Achievement"
date: 2025-08-22
categories: [essays, consciousness, society]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: {% include pull-quote.html quote="From the moment a baby struggles to put on their t-shirt, we learn that accomplishment equals love. This early conditioning drives us toward endless achievement-seeking, while our 'cold individualism' masks our deep interdependence. We chase comfort and reduce others to mere facts, forgetting that growth happens through challenges, not perfection. As Rilke reminds us, 'Perhaps all the dragons in our lives are princesses'—waiting for us to recognize that love asks nothing of us at all." author="--" %}

# The Early Seeds of Achievement-Based Love

A baby, before it can form conscious thought, receives cues from its
environment about when love will flow. Picture a baby struggling to put
on their t-shirt—a simple act that becomes a gateway for affirmation and
celebration when done right. In these moments, the child learns that
accomplishment equals love. This pattern continues throughout childhood,
where expectations met are celebrated and those unmet are greeted with
frustration—either externally when we don't perform, or internally when
we do but find ourselves somehow still unfulfilled.

In this dance of early love and achievement, we mirror what Winnicott
called the {% include pull-quote.html quote="good enough mother" author="not the perfect parent, but one who" %}
gradually allows disappointment to enter the child's world. Yet somehow
our modern lives have twisted this natural process. Where once there was
room for imperfection and growth, we now find ourselves trapped in an
endless cycle of proving our worth. Like children forever trying to
reach the cookie jar, we stretch ourselves toward impossible standards,
forgetting that love, in its purest form, asks nothing of us at all.

As Rilke reminds us, "Perhaps all the dragons in our lives are
princesses who are only waiting to see us act, just once, with beauty
and courage." These dragons—our fears of inadequacy, our desperate need
for validation—might just be waiting for us to recognise them as the
wounded parts of ourselves that need not achievement, but acceptance.

We run our whole lives for this achievement, and it drives us to the
ground. Everything we do is for that approval we so want to feel again.
Even though we may deny it is the only factor, I believe it is one of
the primal factors—the need for belonging that we have hardwired into
us. Because you and I share the same air, and wherever we go, we find
humans having their own quirks, but in that, they are much more like us
than we think.

# The Illusion of Individualism

Here we see our natural organismic behaviour to want to be in groups and
feel the collective spirit that inevitably binds us. This is where we
can imagine that we are steadily killing this spirit in our brain fog of
individualism. We have started to think of only ourselves being able to
satisfy all our needs and an increasing dependence on comfort.

Money, this abstract symbol we chase so religiously, masks a profound
truth about human connection. Each bill we exchange, each digital
transaction we make, obscures the complex web of human relationships
that make our daily lives possible. The coffee we drink in the morning
connects us to farmers across oceans, to traders, roasters, and
baristas—yet we experience it as a simple exchange of currency for
goods. This abstraction of human relationships into monetary value
slowly erodes our awareness of our deep interdependence.

In older societies, as Lewis Hyde shows us, people were bound together
not by currency but by gifts—ongoing cycles of giving and receiving that
created lasting social bonds. When a hunter shared his catch with the
village, it wasn't a transaction but a contribution to a continuing
cycle of reciprocity. When indigenous communities exchanged ceremonial
objects, they weren't just trading items but weaving the fabric of their
social relationships. Each gift carried obligations, stories, and
connections that money, in its cold efficiency, has eliminated. Today's
market economy tricks us into believing we can buy our independence, but
each transaction still carries these invisible threads of human
interdependence, whether we acknowledge them or not.

The Japanese concept of 'amae'—this beautiful acknowledgment of our need
to depend on others—stands in stark contrast to our Western myth of the
self-made individual. It whispers to us an ancient truth: that
dependence is not weakness but the very fabric of human society. As
Buber understood, when we truly meet each other, something divine sparks
between us—"God is the electricity that surges between them." Yet we
keep our distance, afraid perhaps, of the voltage, clinging to our
illusion of independence.

For those who doubt this interdependence, my sincerest advice is to
stop, go out and really try to see what it takes to build a life
completely by yourself. This involves growing your own food, building
your own house and everything that comes with maintaining these. It is
no less than the famous Greek analogy of a Herculean task.

# The Comfort Trap

What's further driven our individuality is comfort. It is when facing
the challenges and hardships in life that people bond together. The path
through collective suffering is strewn with friendships of virtue where
people have found powerful relatability in how one weathers change.
Comfort kills the soul, Khalil Gibran said, and it is my experience too
that it takes away more than it gives.

Most of us realise too late or not at all that something has left us on
our days on the couch that used to once bring light to our innocent
eyes. It is widespread, and increasingly more, that we don't face
hardships to meet our basic needs. This is important because otherwise
we are not truly experiencing our potential and we fall into a nurtured
womb-like state from which we never emerge. The purpose of the womb is
to give birth and living inevitably involves wounds. Our tireless escape
from any kind of injury—mental, physical, emotional or spiritual—makes
us cold and uncaring, not out of intent but a lack of capacity.

Campbell tells us "where you stumble, there lies your treasure," and in
these words echoes an eternal truth about human growth. Consider the
athlete who finds their strength not in victory but in recovering from
defeat, or the artist who discovers their voice only after facing their
deepest fears. Our stumbling points—those moments of crisis and
challenge—are not obstacles to be avoided but gateways to
transformation. As Rumi knew, "The wound is the place where the Light
enters you." We see this in the way a broken bone heals stronger at the
point of fracture, how a forest regenerates more vibrantly after a fire.
These are not mere metaphors but profound patterns that run through all
of life.

Sebastian Junger observed this paradox in contemporary society—how the
very adversities we avoid are the forces that could bind us together
most powerfully. In times of natural disasters, wars, or collective
challenges, people often report feeling more alive and connected than in
times of peace and prosperity. Look at how neighbourhoods come alive
during power outages, how strangers help each other during snowstorms,
how communities rally together after hurricanes. These moments of shared
challenge strip away our artificial barriers and reveal our fundamental
need for each other.

Viktor Frankl, having witnessed humanity at its darkest in concentration
camps, came to see that meaning emerges not from comfort but from our
capacity to bear witness to both suffering and joy. In the camps, he
observed how those who maintained a sense of purpose, who found meaning
even in their suffering, were more likely to survive. This speaks to a
deeper truth about human nature—that we are meaning-making creatures who
come alive not in the absence of challenges but in how we face them.
When we numb ourselves to one aspect of life, be it pain or joy, we
inevitably numb ourselves to both. Our collective flight from discomfort
has left us spiritually anaesthetised, watching life through windows we
dare not open, afraid of both the storm and the sunshine. Yet it is
precisely through these windows that we must learn to reach.

Living, in its fullest sense, means caring for other people and relating
to them beyond your own sense of self, whatever that may include. Our
society also has a delicious liking to reduce other people into facts
that are irrelevant to their whole being. He's a businessman, she's a
politician, he does this, she makes that, they believe in this, their
faith is that. On and on we construct what we think are whole beings out
of singular facets of a real being—one who we neglected to experience.

For how could we experience them fully? Everything we have been taught
in how to relate to the world has been to objectify it. People become
objects with whom we have agreements, and within these agreements, we
find our way to meeting our own needs. This is what we call modern
society. We punish those who meet their needs in ways not previously
agreed upon. We shame those who operate in grey areas for they, unlike
us, are not trying to fit in as hard as we think everyone should. It
makes us uncomfortable and in a society that has started to worship
comfort, the hatred for discomfort has reached sinful levels.

In the hell we are so desperately trying to avoid, we have also lost
sight of the heaven that is in our very hearts and also everywhere we
are. Our lives are by no means perfect but striving for perfection also
brings with it a pair of glasses that can only see imperfection. Growth
in nature is never a striving for perfection but a way of artfully
expressing imperfection. So in this way we can also strive to grow and
make ourselves more relatable to the humanity in others instead of
judging and discarding them into our backroom pile of concepts about the
world. Let us be a light to others in a way that they can be a light to
ourselves when we need it the most. We are all members of life and we
need no conditions to feel this love constantly coursing through our
circulatory systems. We are circles and so is life. Where we come from
is where we go. In the end, nothing is final and everything is changing.
And in all these paradoxes, it is where we come to find ourselves maybe
for the very first time—living it all.

\[Original\]

Today I want to write about 3 things: How we’re raised to find love
through achievement, our cold individualism and societal agreements.

A baby before it can be in cognition gets cuss form its environment that
these are the moments when I would get love. Trying to put a t-shirt on
in the stubborn phase of being a baby where you want to have control
over something yourself because you see parents around you having
control of you and other things. There, this tendency becomes a gateway
for us to get affirmation and celebration when we do something right.
This goes on for most of our childhood and we realise that the
expectations of us are met with frustrations. Either when we don’t
perform and are met with it externally or when we do and find ourselves
frustrated internally. We run our whole lives for this achievement and
it drives us to ashes. All and everything we do is for that approval we
so want to feel again. Even though we may deny it is the only factor, I
believe it is one of the primal factors. The need for belonging that we
have hardwired into us. Because you and I share the same air and
wherever we go, we find humans having their own quirks but in that they
are much more like us than we think.

Here we see our natural organismic behaviour to want to be in groups and
feel the collective spirit that inevitably binds us. This is where we
can imagine that we are steadily killing this spirit in our brain fog of
individualism. We have started to think of only ourselves being able to
satisfy all our needs and an increasing dependence on comfort. Firstly,
the money we easily us to buy everything is a product of cooperation
that is going on behind the scenes. It is proof that you depend on the
actions and trade going on behind the scenes and you get to take part in
it with this money. The illusion of capitalism hides this fact possibly
unknown to itself that it does this, we find ourselves in front of a
beautiful view whose enchantment we keep on consuming. My sincerest
advice is to stop, go out and really try to see what it takes to build a
life completely by yourself. This involves growing your own food,
building your own house and everything that comes with maintaining
these. It is no less than the famous Greek analogy of a Herculean task.

What’s further driven our individuality is comfort. It is when facing
the challenges and hardships in life that people bond together. The path
through collective suffering is strewn with friendships of virtue where
people have found powerful relatability in how one weathers change.
Comfort kills the soul, Khalil Gibran said, and it is my experience too
that it takes away more than it gives. Most of us realise too late or
not at all that something has left us on our days on the couch that used
to once bring light to our innocent eyes. It is widespread, and
increasingly more, that we don’t face hardships to meet our basic needs.
This is important because otherwise we are not truly experiencing our
potential and we fall into a nurtured womb-like state from which we
never emerge. The purpose of the womb is to give birth and living
inevitably involves wounds. Our tireless escape from any kind of injury,
mental, physical or emotional or spiritual makes us cold and
uncaring—not out of intent but a lack of capacity. For to really
experience our potential we need to be knocked down by life’s gusts and
realise in those moments that we can get up. And we do. So we find a
renewed strength more powerful than we thought we have. This is an
integral part of all growth—the suffering into being. It is the
necessary counterpart to the joy of being. If we do not have this joy it
is because we are avoiding the suffering.

Living also means caring for other people and relating to them beyond
your own sense of self, whatever that may encompass. There is also in
our society a delicious penchant to reduce other people into facts that
are irrelevant to their whole being. He’s a businessman, she’s a
politician, he does this, she makes that, they believe in this, their
faith is that. On and on we construct what we think are whole beings out
of singular facets of a real being—one who we neglected to experience.
For how could we? Everything we have been taught in how to relate to the
world has been to objectify it. People are objects with whom we have
agreements and within these agreements, I can find my way to meeting my
own needs. This is what we call modern society. We punish those who meet
their needs in ways not previously agreed upon. We shame those who
operate in grey areas for they, unlike us, are not trying to fit in as
hard as we think everyone should. It makes us uncomfortable and in a
society that has started to worship comfort, the hatred for discomfort
has reached sinful levels.

In the hell we are so desperately trying to avoid, we have also lost
sight of the heaven that is in our very hearts and also everywhere we
are. Our lives are by no means perfect but striving for perfection also
brings with it a pair of glasses that can only see imperfection. Growth
in nature is never a striving for perfection but a way of artfully
expressing imperfection. So in this way we can also strive to grow and
make our selves more relatable to the humanity in others instead of
judging and discarding them into our backroom pile of concepts about the
world. Let us be a light to others in a way that they can be a light to
ourselves when we need it the most. We are all members of life and we
need no conditions to feel this love constantly coursing through our
circulatory systems. We are circles and so is life. Where we come from
is where we go. In the end, nothing is final and everything is changing.
And in all these paradoxes, it is where we come to find ourselves maybe
for the very first time—living it all.

**\[Edited by Claude\]**

**The Pursuit of Love Through Achievement: A Reflection on Modern
Society**

In our contemporary world, three interconnected themes deserve
exploration: the conditioning that leads us to seek love through
achievement, the pervasive cold individualism of our society, and the
unspoken agreements that govern our interactions.

**The Early Seeds of Achievement-Based Love**

From our earliest moments, we receive subtle cues from our environment
about when and how we receive love. As infants, our attempts at
independence—such as struggling to put on a t-shirt—become gateways for
affirmation and celebration when we succeed. This pattern persists
throughout our childhood, shaping our understanding of love and
approval.

The philosopher Alain de Botton reflects on this phenomenon in his work
"Status Anxiety": "We are anxious about our status in the world, about
whether we're failing or succeeding, whether we're worthy or unworthy.
We care about our status for a simple reason: because most people tend
to be nice to us according to the degree to which they perceive us to be
successful."

This early conditioning creates a lifelong drive for achievement, often
pushing us to our limits in pursuit of that elusive approval. While we
may deny its primacy, this need for belonging is hardwired into our very
being. It's a universal human trait that connects us all, despite our
individual quirks and differences.

**The Illusion of Individualism**

Our natural inclination towards group belonging stands in stark contrast
to the prevailing spirit of individualism that permeates modern society.
We've convinced ourselves that we can satisfy all our needs
independently, increasingly relying on personal comfort and convenience.
However, this perception is largely an illusion.

Consider the money we use so freely to purchase goods and services. It's
not merely a personal resource but a product of vast cooperation
occurring behind the scenes. Our ability to participate in this economic
system is proof of our dependence on the actions and trade of countless
others.

The philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau once said, "Man is born free, and
everywhere he is in chains." While Rousseau was referring to societal
constraints, we might adapt this to our modern context: "Man is born
interdependent, and everywhere he believes himself to be independent."

To truly understand the extent of our interdependence, one might attempt
to build a life completely from scratch—growing food, constructing
shelter, and maintaining all aspects of existence without external
support. This Herculean task would quickly reveal the depth of our
reliance on others and the systems we've collectively created.

**The Comfort Trap**

Our increasing individuality is further fueled by the pursuit of
comfort. Paradoxically, it is often through facing challenges and
hardships that people form the strongest bonds. The shared experience of
weathering life's storms creates what Aristotle called {% include pull-quote.html quote="friendships of
virtue" author="relationships built on mutual respect and shared values" %}.

Khalil Gibran wisely noted, "Comfort kills the soul," and indeed,
excessive comfort can rob us of vital experiences that shape our
character and connect us to others. In our modern lives, many of us
rarely face true hardship in meeting our basic needs. While this may
seem beneficial, it can prevent us from realizing our full potential,
leaving us in a perpetual state of stunted growth.

The purpose of comfort, like that of a womb, should be to nurture us
until we're ready to face the world. Life inevitably involves wounds,
and our relentless avoidance of any kind of injury—be it mental,
physical, emotional, or spiritual—can leave us cold and uncaring, not
out of intent but from a lack of capacity to truly empathize and
connect.

**The Reduction of Humanity**

Our society has developed a troubling tendency to reduce people to mere
facts or labels, neglecting the fullness of their being. We categorize
individuals based on their profession, beliefs, or a single aspect of
their identity, failing to experience them as complete, complex humans.

This reductionist approach reflects a broader societal shift towards
objectification. We've been conditioned to view the world, and the
people in it, as objects with whom we have agreements. Within these
agreements, we seek to meet our own needs, often at the expense of
genuine connection and understanding.

The philosopher Martin Buber explored this concept in his work "I and
Thou," arguing for a more holistic way of relating to others: "The basic
word I-You can only be spoken with one's whole being. The basic word
I-It can never be spoken with one's whole being."

**Embracing Imperfection and Interconnectedness**

In our quest to avoid discomfort and achieve perfection, we risk losing
sight of the beauty inherent in our imperfections and
interconnectedness. Growth in nature is never about achieving
flawlessness but about artfully expressing uniqueness through
imperfection.

Rather than striving for an unattainable ideal, we can focus on growing
in ways that make us more relatable to others. By embracing our own
humanity, with all its flaws and quirks, we open ourselves to deeper
connections with those around us.

As the poet Rumi beautifully expressed, "Your task is not to seek for
love, but merely to seek and find all the barriers within yourself that
you have built against it." By dismantling these barriers—of judgment,
of fear, of excessive individuality—we can rediscover our inherent
connection to all of life.

In the end, we are all part of the great circle of existence. Where we
come from is where we go, and in embracing this cyclical nature of life,
we may find ourselves truly living for the very first time.
