---
layout: post
title: "Amusing Ourselves To Death"
date: 2025-09-02
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay explores Neil Postman's prophetic warning in 'Amusing Ourselves to Death,' examining how our culture's shift from print to screen has transformed public discourse into a form of entertainment. It delves into the consequences of a society that prioritizes amusement over rational thought, and questions our ability to engage with serious ideas in an age of endless distraction."
---


I am scrolling on Reddit and I see a video of Donald Trump dancing with
a ceremonial sword. It seems funny, but also like a serious moment. A
ceremonial sword on live TV at an official event is meant to be
serious—isn’t it? Seeing these two things mixed together hits a nerve,
creating an uneasy feeling, a sense that something is off in our modern
world of entertainment. It makes me wonder how we now seem unable to
take almost anything seriously. Or perhaps, how serious things are
constantly being repackaged as just another form of entertainment.
Memes, movies, and mindless fun have flooded our lives. We're swimming
in a state where everything risks becoming a joke—and yet, we let it
happen, just keep scrolling onward.

Many years ago, two writers with great foresight predicted how society
might break down and turn into an oppressive nightmare. But they
imagined very different ways this could happen. George Orwell wrote the
stark warning *Nineteen Eighty-Four (1984)*, while Aldous Huxley
imagined the tempting world of *A Brave New World*. Both books described
societies that were bad places to live, but in different ways. In
Orwell's world, people were controlled openly through fear and
punishment. History was changed, and books were burned to stop people
from getting information and knowledge. Control came through pain and
censorship. In Huxley’s world, however, control came through pleasure.
Important information and useful knowledge weren't banned; they were
simply lost in a huge sea of unimportant information, silly
distractions, and non-stop amusement. The people in this world,
overloaded with pleasure and useless facts, lost interest in thinking
deeply, in history, in reading altogether. Does this sound familiar?

![Dystopian cityscape during crisis](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1599689018459-fcf807a9eceb?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwyfHxkeXN0b3BpYXxlbnwwfHx8fDE3NDMyMzAyODB8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Patrick Perkins](https://unsplash.com/@patrickperkins) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

Welcome to Dystopia—the troubled future, now arrived! It’s very possible
that we’re all living in it now, whether we chose to or not. Social
media content is quick and comes in small bites. It gives you the
immediate feeling, the quick hit, but rarely the background story—the
crucial information we need to truly understand something. Instead, this
‘bite-sized’ content cares more about getting likes and shares than
helping us understand. It’s designed to keep us hooked, scrolling,
reacting, rather than giving us a whole idea to think about carefully.
All the while, it weakens our ability to focus for long periods and
understand things deeply. Neil Postman’s insightful 1985 book, Amusing
Ourselves to Death, is a key guide for understanding the situation we're
in. He argued very convincingly that the way we get our information (the
medium) strongly shapes how we think and what our society is like. He
believed the shift from a culture based on reading print to one based on
images and electronic media (and now, we must add, a digital world
driven by algorithms) wasn't simply an upgrade in technology, but a
disaster for how we know and understand things.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="Reading is thinking. And thinking is hard work. It requires patience, concentration, and a willingness to grapple with complex ideas. In a world saturated with instant gratification and bite-sized information, the act of reading—true reading—becomes an act of resistance." author="Neil Postman" %}

Postman looked back, maybe with some longing but also with sharp
analysis, to a time when the printed word was dominant, especially in
early America. He argued that because print was so common, it encouraged
a certain kind of public conversation. People were used to following
long, complex arguments, understanding different viewpoints, and dealing
with ideas in a steady, logical way. The written word, unlike the
fast-flickering images of modern media, makes you actively participate.
It requires thinking in a line, step-by-step, and holding several ideas
in your mind as you follow a long argument. As Postman pointed out,
{% include pull-quote.html quote="Typography \[using print\] is by its nature a technique for slowing
down communication, as anyone who has watched a reader's eyes move
across a page can attest." %}

The simple act of figuring out sentences, following connections, and
building meaning from marks on a page encourages a different way of
thinking—one that values patience, analysis, and thinking things through
in order. This "way of thinking shaped by reading print," Postman
suggested, was the foundation for the reasoned public debates that were
common in early America, which you could see in the detailed writing of
historical documents or famous debates.

![Historical debate and discussion](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1679833645645-e262e042f532?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHwzNXx8ZGViYXRlfGVufDB8fHx8MTc0MzE2NjgzMXww&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Llyfrgell Genedlaethol Cymru / The National Library of Wales](https://unsplash.com/@llgc) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

While Postman focused a lot on America, looking at reading habits and
how information was shared in different parts of the world around the
same time (late 1700s to early 1800s) helps us understand the bigger
picture of print's influence—and what happened when its influence faded.
In Europe, especially places like England and France, there was a
similar strong tradition of using writing for discussion, although it
was often divided up by social class. The European coffee houses in the
1700s were important meeting places for ideas. Newspapers and leaflets
were read out loud and discussed there, meaning that even people who
couldn't read could join in the conversation. This created what
historians call the "public sphere," a space where ideas could be shared
and argued about across different social groups. The French Revolution,
just like America's revolution, was heavily pushed forward by printed
leaflets and writings about politics.

However, this wasn't the pattern everywhere. India offers an interesting
comparison. India had ancient and deep traditions of learning through
writing, especially in languages like Sanskrit and Persian. But often,
the main way knowledge was shared worked differently. During the time
Britain ruled India (1757-1947), many traditional ways of sharing
knowledge were disturbed. Alongside written texts, India had a strong
tradition of passing knowledge directly from teacher to student in
person (*the guru-shishya parampara*). Written texts existed, but they
were often used as memory aids—meant to be learned by heart, spoken
aloud, and explained through speech, rather than mostly read silently
and alone like in the West. This encouraged a different kind of
intellectual discussion, based strongly on memory, speaking aloud, and
understanding things together as a group. It didn't depend as much on
large numbers of people reading privately as the American culture
Postman described.

Similarly, China during the Qing Dynasty (1644-1912) had a very advanced
culture based on writing, focused on a difficult exam system for
government jobs. Knowing classic texts well was the path to getting
ahead in society, putting reading and analysing texts at the centre of
the upper classes. However, this system was more about keeping,
explaining, and using accepted classic works rather than the kind of
open public debate, often with opposing sides, that print encouraged in
Postman's America. Also, the Chinese writing system itself—using symbols
for words or ideas (like characters) instead of letters—shapes different
ways the brain works and different connections between the reader and
the text compared to cultures using alphabets.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge? Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?" author="T.S. Eliot, Choruses from 'The Rock' (1934)" %}

![The contemplative act of reading](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1598024055266-e772a5f8c128?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw0fHxyZWFkaW5nfGVufDB8fHx8MTc0MzIyMjEyOXww&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Matias North](https://unsplash.com/@matiasnorth) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*

Looking at these different histories around the world shows us something
important about Postman's argument: the special connection he saw
between printed text and public discussion in America really depended on
its unique mix of factors. These included lots of people being able to
read (helped by the Protestant religion encouraging people to read the
Bible themselves), ideas about democracy, and using printing technology
early on for mass communication. While Europe shared some aspects of
this print tradition (though often with bigger divides between classes),
other major cultures like India and China had different, equally
complex, but differently organised ways of relating written words,
spoken traditions, memory, and the sharing of knowledge.

Thinking about this history actually makes Postman's main warning
clearer. It shows that while the way people engaged in deep thinking
varied across cultures (through spoken debate, studying texts,
memorising, reading line by line), the modern shift towards quick,
visual, and now digitally broken-up media is a challenge faced more
uniformly across the globe. It's a move away from focused attention and
complex thought. No matter which specific cultural tradition is being
worn away, we’re all losing something vital to enhance our understanding
of the world. The danger Postman saw—that public life (all the things
that affect us collectively) becomes shallow and unimportant because
it's treated like entertainment—has spread like a disease globally. It's
been made much worse by technologies he could only barely imagine.

The flickering television screen that Postman saw as the main problem
has been replaced, or maybe boosted, by the endless scrolling of the
internet and the personalised stream of attention-grabbing content fed
to us by social media algorithms. If television turned politics and news
into a kind of show business, the internet has broken it down even more.
Now it's an endless flow of headlines without background information,
anger that spreads quickly online, trends that last only a moment, and
addictive pictures and sounds. The "bite-sized" nature isn't just about
it being short; it's also about the speed and the amount. We consume
little bits of information very quickly, rarely stopping to digest them,
question them, or connect the pieces. Our mental ability to stay focused
gets weaker, leading to what some people bluntly call "brain rot" a feeling that we're losing the ability to focus, think critically,
remember things properly, or solve complex problems. The constant flood
of information trains us to be distracted—and to look for distractions.
It rewards quickly scanning things and reacting immediately, rather than
thinking patiently.

{% include pull-quote.html quote="The medium is the message.(The way we get information shapes us more than the information itself)" author="Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (1964)" %}

![The medium of television](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1588473158757-afdb399558d6?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw1fHx0ZWxldmlzaW9ufGVufDB8fHx8MTc0MzE3NTI4MXww&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by [Nabil Saleh](https://unsplash.com/@nabilsaleh) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*


This kind of environment is perfect ground for misinformation and "fake
news" to spread rapidly. When background information is left out just to
get more clicks, and when algorithms designed to keep us hooked push
emotional reactions over facts, telling truth from lies becomes
exhausting, maybe even impossible. Even worse is the huge increase in
what we could call information we can't do anything about. We are
bombarded with news alerts, facts, figures, and distant problems from
all over the world. Yet, much of it leaves us feeling helpless. We know
about countless problems, but the information rarely shows us clear ways
we can take meaningful action in our own lives or communities. This
flood of data, strangely enough, can lead not to people getting involved
because they're informed, but to feeling overwhelmed, distrustful, and
eventually, just not caring anymore. We are drowning in information, yet
starving for wisdom and the power to make a difference.

So, are we truly amusing ourselves to death? Postman's harsh phrase
feels less like an exaggeration and more like an accurate description of
the problem with each passing year. The sword dance becomes a funny
picture online, the political crisis becomes a popular keyword, the
environmental disaster becomes a video we quickly swipe past. The
non-stop turning of everything serious into entertainment, or at least
into content we consume and throw away, numbs our ability to recognise
what's important, to feel the proper seriousness of things, to respond
with thoughtful action. We are caught in a cycle where the technologies
we built to connect us and share information accidentally (or
purposely?) encourage distraction, division, and making public life seem
trivial and unimportant.

The challenge now isn't just to consume less, but to develop once again
the habits of mind—focus, critical thinking, understanding context, and
demanding depth—that the age of print, with all its own problems, once
helped support. Our current digital age seems set on putting out these
very habits. The glow of the screen is tempting, the endless scroll is
hard to resist, but the cost of this amusement might be far higher than
we think. We pay for it with our collective attention, our shared
understanding, and in the end, our ability to govern ourselves
meaningfully.
