---
layout: post
title: "The Nature Of Belief"
date: 2025-08-24
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay explores how beliefs shape our reality, acting as both a necessary grounding mechanism and a potential prison. It examines the 'epidemiology of representations'—how beliefs spread like viruses—and the psychological need for certainty that can lead to dogmatism, urging a balance of conviction with a healthy dose of doubt."
---

## How Beliefs Shape Our Certainty

*“We don't see things as they are, we see them as we are.” - Anaïs Nin*

![woman in church](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1572977221447-056868f11aae?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw1NXx8YmVsaWVmfGVufDB8fHx8MTczNzgxNzExM3ww&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Thomas Vitali on Unsplash*

From the whispered stories around ancient fires to the viral tweets of
today, humans have always been compelled to share their beliefs and
their certainties. The mechanisms may have evolved—from stone tablets to
digital tablets—but the underlying drive remains the same. Beliefs have
always found ways to flow from one mind to another, carving channels
through the landscape of human consciousness.

I wonder: From the times of the ancient Catholics to the modern day
where people hold silly and personal beliefs, was it always the case
that humans wanted to push their beliefs onto others—whether covertly or
overtly?

I wonder how much this plays a part in modern social conditioning. When
someone wishes for someone else to live the way they do, it is
overpowering for the other person's consciousness. The
**belief-peddler** feels like they are in the right and not only that,
they also have the backing of superior reason. Where back in the day the
backing came from divine reason or a godly power in communion with the
belief-peddler, today it often comes wrapped in the authority of
science, data, or lived experience. (The worst authority being: *I read
it on the internet)*

Hannah Arendt reminds us that humans “...can experience meaningfulness
only because they can talk with and make sense to each other and
themselves.” Perhaps this desperate need to share our certainties stems
from something deeper than mere conviction—it speaks to our fundamental
need to create shared meaning in a world that often seems meaningless.
Like ancient storytellers gathering around fires, we're still trying to
make sense of our existence together.

What’s fascinating is how this pattern of belief transmission has
remained constant even as its expressions have transformed. The medieval
monk copying manuscripts by candlelight and the modern influencer
crafting viral content are engaged in surprisingly similar acts of
*conviction-sharing*. Both are vessels for what anthropologist Dan
Sperber calls the “epidemiology of representations”—the way beliefs
spread through populations like contagious diseases.

If I look at people who have their little life hacks, their little
values for what makes a good person, their little tricks for what makes
a smart person, their little advice for what makes a financially savvy
person, their little pointers for the way technology should be
treated—then I’m looking at the same phenomena through a different lens.
These modern certainties, despite their materialistic appearance, carry
the same missionary zeal that once powered religious conversions.

Perhaps in our rush to understand belief, we sometimes forget to pause
and wonder at its mystery. Like watching waves shape shorelines or winds
carve mountains, we're witnessing forces both ancient and immediate,
both personal and universal.

![A chart showing the cycle of belief](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!XsMC!f_autoq_auto:goodfl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F934668a2-dd9c-4887-8786-24cdb3c62662_1080x441.jpeg)
*Image by Morgan Housel*

## A Virus of Certainty

In the presence of convictions, a believer is born. Belief then passes
onward through conviction—a mechanism that puts doubt to the side and
allows the believer to pursue a course of action their belief accepts as
true. It is nearly like a virus, belief is only confirmed when it
converts someone else. There is no way for the belief to exist in
isolation for that would drive the person mad. A convicted believer does
not like to be wrong and does not like when their doubts bother their
beliefs.

William James, in his seminal work “*The Will to Believe*,” suggests
something profound about this process. He argues that certain beliefs
require us to accept them before they can prove themselves
true—something simple like confidence or believing in your ability to
swim before entering the water. Yet this very mechanism that enables
learning and growth can also trap us in cycles of self-confirming
delusion. The swimmer who never enters the water, convinced of either
their mastery or inadequacy, remains untested in their belief.

It’s funny how the world works so much on interpretation. The
interpreter believes the information has been correctly interpreted and
this makes them believe in the message. This message is crucial to the
seed that will give birth to their theories. These theories will then
take an emotional hold and will rise up towards the sky encompassing
their whole sphere of experience. It is a strange and curious thing that
even half-truths, under the powerful lens of belief, seem to be
confirmed everywhere one looks.

When our interpretations align with others, we build bridges of
understanding. But when they diverge, we risk creating isolated islands
of certainty, each convinced of its own rightness. In our digital age,
these islands have become echo chambers, reinforced by algorithms that
reflect our beliefs back to us with mechanical precision and
unfortunately causing only more social and ideological isolation. As
Arendt observed, we risk losing the “common world” that makes genuine
dialogue possible—that shared reality where different perspectives can
meet and transform each other.

The person passing on their belief naturally thinks they are right but
in this process they believe they are not only right but the only ones
who are right. This **exclusivity of belief** is also common to more
strands of dogmatic belief where a person cannot accept that other
beliefs can be true alongside theirs. This exclusivity gives birth to a
kind of fanaticism—but I feel this may depend on a person’s personality
as well. There are covert and overt fanaticists. Some people have their
unshakable beliefs but will never tell them to anyone or engage with
anyone else’s beliefs. They do what they want, in the way they want for
they are guided by a higher reason—either scientific, medical or divine.

“*Belief like any other moving body follows the path of least
resistance*,” wrote Samuel Butler, and modern research in cognitive
psychology confirms this insight. We now know that our brains are wired
to seek confirmation of our existing beliefs, what psychologists call
“confirmation bias.” This natural tendency, essential perhaps for
maintaining some psychological stability, becomes problematic in a world
where beliefs can spread globally at the speed of light.

What strange creatures we are—seeking certainty while living in a
universe that offers none. Yet this tension itself might hold a key to
understanding our relationship with belief.

## Between Doubt and Dogma

![person holding light bulb](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!VVX_!f_autoq_auto:goodfl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F13aaf522-0acc-4604-8306-500e4a398ff3_1080x1076.jpeg)
*Photo by Diego PH on Unsplash*

*“The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always
so certain of themselves, and wiser people so full of doubts.” -
Bertrand Russell*

It is natural for us to do this because the human mind works on
selective attention. It selectively produces things based on what it has
observed. Perception is never total and never absolutely objective but
intimately subjective. Like a garden where we only tend to the plants we
recognize, our minds cultivate the beliefs that feel familiar, that
offer us stable ground to stand on.

What works for humans is to be confirmed in their little beliefs than to
have them knocked out of the park all the time. If one’s beliefs were
rejected all the time, the person would feel substantially ungrounded
and would be under threat of going crazy. It does seem we need some sort
of truth, even an inkling of it, to keep us grounded and sure that we
exist. For our beliefs confirm our perceptions which also confirms that
the world exist as we perceive it.

Contemporary research in neuroscience reveals something profound about
this need for stability: *our brains actually consume less energy when
processing information that confirms our existing beliefs.* Like water
flowing downhill, we naturally seek the path of least resistance. But
this efficiency comes at a cost—the same neural pathways that help us
navigate the world can become trenches too deep to escape.

This is possibly why people choose to subscribe to harmful beliefs,
dogmas, religions and social customs because it gives them this security
and psychological safety. This psychological safety gives them the
conviction of having an already accepted belief, a theory that needs not
to be tested but reproduced and celebrated countless times. It is an
efficient form of social grounding and a process that, I believe, has
not been invented but exists in the way the human organism relates with
itself. It is an outcome of the nature of the hidden social fabric we
are a part of.

Hannah Arendt observed this collective agreement on reality—even when
that reality is distorted—provides a kind of social shelter (The USA?).
“The trouble with lying and deceiving is that their efficiency depends
entirely upon **the clear notion of the truth** that the liar and
deceiver wishes to hide,” she wrote. In other words, even our delusions
require shared understanding.

But it comes at a cost. The independent thinker is therefore rare and
treads a dangerous path. They must be totally sure of what they are
believing and why. They must build this system in partnership with
nature and all that they observe in society and among its people. Each
principle, theory or pattern must be checked to see if it conforms to
reality in various circumstances. It is nearly a form of science itself
and can be likened to developing philosophies or philosophizing in
general.

In the end, it is up to us what we do with our beliefs, how much we
choose to believe them and how much we push them onto others. My belief
can be corrosive to me as well and without realising it I would be doing
harm to myself all in the good name of reason, intellect, logic or god.
Krishnamurti says all belief is destructive for it has roots in thought
and by nature, thought is divisive. It makes two sides of a thing
instead of leaving the thing whole.

Like a river that carves through rock, our beliefs shape not just our
thoughts but the very landscape of our experience. Contemporary research
in cognitive science suggests that our beliefs actually filter what
we’re capable of perceiving—like coloured glasses we’ve worn so long
we’ve forgotten they’re there. This is both our strength and our
vulnerability: the same certainties that help us navigate the world can
become the walls of our own psychological prison.

I also wonder if there are beliefs that originate emotionally—but my
suspicion is that feelings felt are concretized and rationalised into
beliefs by that very thought-producing capacity itself. We’re like
architects building homes from our experiences, but sometimes we forget
that homes need windows and doors, spaces for light and air to flow
through. A belief held too tightly becomes a bunker rather than a
shelter.

The challenge, perhaps, is not to live without beliefs—an impossible
task—but to hold them more lightly, to maintain what philosopher Rebecca
Solnit calls “hope in the dark.” This means cultivating a kind of
dynamic stability, one that allows for both certainty and doubt, like a
tree that bends with the wind rather than standing rigid against it.

So are our beliefs destructive? I’ll leave it to you to decide. But it
stands to reason that we not be as right as we think we are. All belief
works best with a healthy dose of doubt which not only refines our
beliefs but also prevents us from senselessly forcing them upon others.
Convincing others to adopt what we believe is a social mechanism that
has its place but I wonder if we can use it for its generative power
rather than for its destructive and degrading power.

The path forward might lie in Arendt’s concept of “enlarged
thinking”—the capacity to consider multiple perspectives while
maintaining our own ground. This isn't merely about tolerance or
relativism; it's about imagining how the world appears to others while
holding onto our own truth. Like a tree with deep roots that can still
sway in the wind, we might learn to be both grounded and flexible in our
beliefs.

This expanded way of thinking allows our social beliefs to not only
empower individuals but also bring them together into a cohesive society
that is stronger because it is together. This is not a call for
relativism, but for a more nuanced understanding of how beliefs can
either bridge or barrier our connections with others and ourselves.

Like the ancient practice of philosophical dialogue, perhaps we can
learn to dance with our beliefs rather than being imprisoned by them. In
this dance, both certainty and doubt have their place, each step
informed by the wisdom that comes from knowing how little we truly know.
