---
layout: post
title: "The Self Obsessed Society"
date: 2025-08-26
categories: essays
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: ""
---

This essay takes the work of two philosophers at the heart of modern
critique. Byung-Chul Han and Slavoj Žižek’s work has shown us ways in
which society has masked its problems by a show of shiny veneer that
seems attractive but has been sweeping the problems under the social
media rug.

If we look at an Instagram influencer’s stories and it is always
something that makes them look beautiful and attractive. However, I have
met some influencers (and the aspiring ones), and while they are
beautiful, they are also normal. It is this self-obsessive tendency I
see expressed everywhere in society and the monkeys that we are, we
naturally want to imitate this.

We're all worshipping at the altar of ourselves. Ridiculously trying to
make our place in this world that continues to make us feel
insignificant. Somehow the obsession with our own images is the new kind
of religion.

This digital self-worship eerily mirrors what Jacques Lacan called *the
mirror stage*. It’s that crucial moment when an infant first recognizes
their reflection and simultaneously experiences joy and alienation. Like
that child, we fall in love with an image that feels more complete than
how we feel inside, more perfect than our actual experience of
ourselves. But unlike the infant's mirror stage, which occurs once,
social media traps us in an endless loop of mirror stages, each
reflection promising a more perfect version of ourselves. We become
perpetual infants, constantly reaching for an impossible wholeness, lost
in our imagination.

This new religion operates through a digital realm where exposure
becomes sacred and privacy profane. In our society, your value is not
measured by inner worth but by visibility, by the degree to which one
can be seen, liked, and followed. The digital age has transformed the
traditional religious impulse into a compulsive need for self-display.

## The Performance: A Cracked Mirror

Slavoj Žižek's concept of *interpassivity* helps explain this
phenomenon. We don't merely imitate what we see; we outsource our very
being to our digital avatars. Our online profiles ‘enjoy’ life for us,
‘live’ for us, while we exhaust ourselves maintaining these idealized
versions of ourselves. The result is a peculiar form of alienation where
we become spectators of our own performed happiness.

How has it come to be that we have lost this ability to perceive the
viewpoints and needs of others? How come we have become mindlessly
absorbed in the sole viewpoint we have available to us? Are we simply
sightseeing in our landscape alone? Are we the God whose temple we are
worshipping at?

The tyranny and dictatorship of our micromanaged selves reeks of bad
breath and outdated morals. We have become the victims of our own
success and forgotten what imperfect beings we were that made that
success happen. But right now, it's not even that we're the most
important person in our universe, it is that we're the only person in
our universe.

Imagine a hall of mirrors where each reflection must be more perfect
than the last. This is what Žižek calls *spiritual capitalism* – where
self-improvement becomes not just a pursuit but an obligation. We're no
longer told simply to succeed; we must transform our very being into a
project of endless optimization. Like a snake eating its own tail, we
consume ourselves in the process of trying to become our ideal selves.

Post-modern society specifically creates this kind of person with the
proliferation of memes, perfect ideas and unreachable ideals—there is so
much success and perfection intrinsically demanded of us that we feel
like failures from the very start. Nowhere is this most prominent than
with Gen Z and younger. To counter this difficult feeling, they have
from a young age decided to play the game in an underhanded way. Fake it
till you make it, they decided inside themselves and casually forgot in
due time that they were playing the game.

This forgetting is what Žižek calls *ideological cynicism* – a state
where we know very well what we're doing, yet we do it anyway. The young
generation's relationship with social media perfectly exemplifies this:
they're often the first to criticize its artificiality, to mock its
conventions, to expose its fraudulent nature—yet they continue to
participate with increasing intensity. The traditional wisdom of ‘know
thyself’ has transformed into create thyself, as we perform our
authenticity for an audience we've internalized so deeply we no longer
recognize its presence. The pretence of ‘faking it’ initially serves as
a psychological shield, but gradually, the performance becomes more real
than the reality it was meant to imitate. We find ourselves trapped in a
cycle where our awareness of the game's artificial nature doesn't free
us from playing it but rather makes us play it more perfectly.

What makes this particularly insidious is how our culture of digital
exposure creates a paradoxical form of intimacy. We share more than ever
before, eliminating every shadow and mystery from our lives, yet feel
increasingly isolated. This compulsive need for transparency doesn't
just affect what we share; it reshapes how we experience ourselves. The
younger generation hasn't merely adapted to this contradiction; they've
internalized it. Their performance isn't just a mask they wear; it's
becoming their skin.

The social media landscape has become our new symbolic order, complete
with its own unwritten rules, rituals, and demands for performance. We
don't just perform for our followers; we perform for an internalized
audience that shapes our every post, every photo, every carefully
crafted caption. Our digital avatars both reflect and construct our
reality, making it increasingly difficult to distinguish between the
authentic self and the curated one.

## The Trap

This crisis of authenticity isn't limited to digital natives. Those who
came of age before social media find themselves caught in a different
but equally compelling performance. The older generation that has not
had success, and often been sidelined during their lives, is also waking
up to this promise of endless attention. Having witnessed the apparent
success of digital self-creation from the outside, they too are being
seduced by its false promises.

The dominating views of our older generations, that influenced
millennials while growing up, stand in stark contrast to the society
today. While our parents' generation fought tangible struggles—improving
living conditions, building better systems, creating material
progress—we inhabit their upgraded world. The old narrative of constant
progress has shattered. Yet despite having no clear target for
improvement, the younger generation faces relentless pressure to upgrade
something, anything. The motivation isn't there but the demands to the
younger generation is still there. So what are they supposed to improve?
What are they supposed to upgrade? What are they supposed to perfect?

Well, themselves of course. It is the only thing in their environment
that is still imperfect. But a living being cannot upgrade that same
living being. A knife cannot cut itself, a hammer cannot mend itself. So
there is an inherent futility in this chase. Gen Z knows how pointless
this is but they also know society won't stop demanding it from them.
Even if their parents don't care, their friends care, their relatives
care, their teachers care. So they put on a perfect face—and somehow
they end up falling in love with it.

Our human desire to make ourselves better is a natural part of growth
and progressing as a human being. But should we confuse this natural
tendency with the capitalistic tendency for eternal progress then we
can't stop making ourselves better—this becomes a sickness.

We start loving our idealised version and that's not who we really are.
We don't love our imperfect, trauma ridden and insecure self. That self
is not only hidden from the world but also a self we're desperately
trying to escape from. We start believing, falsely, that if we keep up
this charade of progress and perfection that we'll somehow become that
person we can finally love.

In this context, Žižek's critique of *Western Buddhism* and mindfulness
culture becomes particularly relevant. What appears as an escape from
the rat race of self-optimization is often just another form of
ideological manipulation. As he argues, these practices often serve as
the perfect spiritual supplement to neoliberal self-exploitation,
helping us to ‘better cope’ with our alienation rather than addressing
its root causes.

The older generation that has not had success and often been sidelined
is also waking up now to this idea that they can have it all. They are
obsessed with their own progress and making a project not only of
themselves but also of their surroundings. They now desperately crave
what others around them had—power, success, status. So their idealised
image is based off the perfection they were told to chase in their
generation. Instead of enjoying their old age, or their circumstances,
they find themselves dissatisfied with everything because something in
them calls for more.

## Breaking Free

In the end, no one wins. We're all failures to ourselves because we've
failed to accept ourselves as we are. No flower is perfect and there is
no idealised image in nature. Nature with its imperfections is the
perfect image of living in the natural world. Nothing in nature is
envious of the other, but we are. Driven by the envy we callously call
desire, we're fighting ourselves to become anything other than
ourselves.

What does it look like to embrace imperfection? It might involve a
little rebellion but not on the outside but inside ourselves. There is a
demand we've internalised and that we're acting from. We have to fight
that. Eventually, society will ask us to be a certain way and we have to
remember that we can choose to agree to decline politely. That's the
only way change will happen, otherwise this sickness will simply take
another form in the coming generations. So it is less a question of
perfection but of health.

This is where Žižek's concept of *traversing the fantasy* becomes
crucial. It's not enough to simply recognize our self-imposed prison of
perfectionism, we must go through the painful process of dismantling it.
This means confronting not just our own illusions, but the very
structure that makes these illusions seem necessary. As Žižek puts it,
"Freedom hurts. Less than the hurt that comes from remaining caught in
the fantasy, but it hurts nevertheless." The real act of rebellion isn't
in creating a better version of ourselves, but in accepting that there
is no perfect version to attain.

We have a choice, whether to perpetuate health or perpetuate sickness.
But this choice isn't as simple as choosing between perfection and
imperfection. Like the infant in Lacan's mirror stage, we must learn to
reconcile our fragmented reality with our idealized image. Yet unlike
that infant, we can choose to step away from the mirror. We must go
toward what Žižek calls *the courage of hopelessness* – the willingness
to abandon our fantasies of perfect self-realization and face the void
they were covering up. Only then, paradoxically, might we find genuine
freedom in the imperfection we've been running from all along.

This is perhaps the most radical act available to us in our transparency
society: not the endless pursuit of self-improvement, but the courage to
embrace our inherent incompleteness. To find freedom not in the
reflection, but in the spaces between reflections, in the shadows our
society so desperately tries to eliminate. The question isn't whether
we'll choose perfection or imperfection, but whether we're brave enough
to shatter the mirror altogether.

\[Original text\]

We’re all worshipping at the altar of ourselves. Ridiculously trying to
make our place in this world that continues to make us feel
insignificant. Somehow the obsession with our own images is the new kind
of religion.

I look at her Instagram stories and it is always something that makes
her look beautiful. However, I have met her, and while she is beautiful,
she is also normal. It is somehow this self-obsessive tendency I see
expressed everywhere in society and the monkeys that we are, we
naturally want to imitate this.

How has it come to be that we have lost this ability to perceive the
viewpoints and needs of others? How come we have become mindlessly
absorbed in the sole viewpoint we have available to us? Are we simply
sightseeing in our landscape alone? Are we the God whose temple we are
worshipping at?

The tyranny and dictatorship of our micromanaged selves reeks of bad
breath and outdated morals. We have become the victims of our own
success and forgotten what imperfect beings we were that made that
success happen. But right now, it’s not even that we’re the most
important person in our universe, it is that we’re the only person in
our universe.

Post-modern society specifically creates this kind of person with the
proliferation of memes, perfect ideas and unreachable ideals—there is so
much success and perfection intrinsically demanded of us that we feel
like failures from the very start. Nowhere is this most prominent than
with Gen Z and younger. To counter this difficult feeling, they have
from a young age decided to play the game in an underhanded way. Fake it
till you make it, they decided inside themselves and casually forgot in
due time that they were playing the game.

The kind of dominating views of our older generations that millennials
have grown up with stand in stark contrast to the society today. Back
then everyone wanted to upgrade their living situation, there was
imperfection and struggle everywhere. It was also this struggle and dire
difficulty that provided the motivation for society and individuals to
want to work and upgrade it. But now? There is little or no struggle and
society is already upgraded. The idea of constant progress is
shattering. The motivation isn’t there but the demands to the younger
generation is still there. So what are they supposed to improve? What
are they supposed to upgrade? What are they supposed to perfect?

Well, themselves of course. It is the only thing in their environment
that is still imperfect. But a living being cannot upgrade that same
living being. A knife cannot cut itself, a hammer cannot mend itself. So
there is an inherent futility in this chase. Gen Z knows how pointless
this is but they also know society won’t stop demanding it from them.
Even if their parents don’t care, their friends care, their relatives
care, their teachers care. So they put on a perfect face—and somehow
they end up falling in love with it.

Our human desire to make ourselves better is a natural part of growth
and progressing as a human being. But should we confuse this natural
tendency with the capitalistic tendency for eternal progress then we
can’t stop making ourselves better—this becomes a sickness. We start
loving our idealised version and that’s not who we really are. We don’t
love our imperfect, trauma ridden and insecure self. That self is not
only hidden from the world but also a self we’re desperately trying to
escape from. We start believing, falsely, that if we keep up this
charade of progress and perfection that we’ll somehow become that person
we can finally love. We’ll have no flaws, no traumas, nothing wrong with
us—we’ll become the living embodiment of the Instagram influencer image.

But it is not only with the younger generation that this idea plays
havoc. The older generation that has not had success and often been
sidelined is also waking up now to this idea that they can have it all.
They are obsessed with their own progress and making a project not only
of themselves but also of their surroundings. They now desperately crave
what others around them had—power, success, status. So their idealised
image is based off the perfection they were told to chase in their
generation. Instead of enjoying their old age, or their circumstances,
they find themselves dissatisfied with everything because something in
them calls for more.

In the end, no one wins. We’re all failures to ourselves because we’ve
failed to accept ourselves as we are. No flower is perfect and there is
no idealised image in nature. Nature with its imperfections is the
perfect image of living in the natural world. Nothing in nature is
envious of the other, but we are. Driven by the envy we callously call
desire, we’re fighting ourselves to become anything other than
ourselves.

What does it look like to embrace imperfection? It might involve a
little rebellion but not on the outside but inside ourselves. There is a
demand we’ve internalised and that we’re acting from. We have to fight
that. Eventually, society will ask us to be a certain way and we have to
remember that we can choose to agree to decline politely. That’s the
only way change will happen, otherwise this sickness will simply take
another form in the coming generations. So it is less a question of
perfection but of health.

We have a choice, whether to perpetuate health or perpetuate sickness. I
wonder what we’ll choose.
