---
layout: post
title: "A History Of Yoga: The Pizza Effect"
date: 2025-08-17
categories: [society, consciousness]
tags: [yoga, culture, spirituality, history]
series: "A History Of Yoga"
series_part: 1
featured_image: "/assets/images/yoga-history-featured.jpg"
excerpt: "From ancient practice to modern movement: How physical culture transformed an ancient tradition. When I first encountered 'yoga' in the West, I felt like a traveller discovering a familiar landscape transformed into something almost unrecognizable."
reading_time: 10
author: "Anubhav Kandpal"
---

From ancient practice to modern movement: How physical culture
transformed an ancient tradition

When I first encountered 'yoga' in the West, I felt like a traveller
discovering a familiar landscape transformed into something almost
unrecognizable. It seemed to how I remembered it, how I’d experienced
it. After taking a few classes and bruising muscles I rarely used, I
started avoiding all forms of it in the west. I assumed a kind of
elitism because since I was Indian, I knew what ‘real yoga’ was and this
wasn’t it. But over time I started thinking quite differently about Yoga
and how, maybe none of us, really knew what real Yoga is.

The word Yoga comes from the Indo-European root word *yeug-*, meaning to
join or to unite. This is the same word at the root of ‘yoke’ and at the
root of *yugo* in Yugoslavia – the now extinct united nation of the
Slavic people.

So, Yoga was essentially a way to unite body and soul, to join matter to
spirit. It was first and foremost a spiritual practice where the seeker
sought unity. The following line from the Katha Upanishad, written in
around the 1^(st) century BCE, illustrates this well:

यदा पञ्चावतिष्ठन्ते ज्ञानानि मनसा सह ।  
बुद्धिश्च न विचेष्टते तामाहुः परमां गतिम् ॥ १० ॥  
तां **योग**मिति मन्यन्ते स्थिरामिन्द्रियधारणाम् ।  
अप्रमत्तस्तदा भवति **योगो** हि प्रभवाप्ययौ ॥ ११ ॥

Only when *Manas* (mind) with thoughts and the five senses stand
still,  
and when *Buddhi* (intellect, power to reason) does not waver, that they
call the highest path.  
**That is what one calls Yoga**, the stillness of the senses,
concentration of the mind,  
It is not thoughtless heedless sluggishness, Yoga is creation and
dissolution.

— *Katha Upanishad, 2.6.10–11*

In part two of this essay we will go into Yoga Philosophy. Here, let’s
explore how recent history led to the popularisation of ‘Postural Yoga’,
or what we’ll call modern yoga.

For most of history, until the end of the 19^(th) century, Yoga in the
form of postures and asanas was seen as a preparation exercise toward
real yoga, which was mainly a meditation practice. The *asanas* were in
a way, different seats of meditation where the seeker could gain
different insights and perspectives from different postures. The Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali mention them only briefly.

Around 1100 CE, the emergence of Hatha Yoga is recorded. The word
Sanskrit word हठ Hatha, means ‘force’. It was practiced mostly in secret
by yogis in isolation. According to yoga scholar Mark Singleton, Hatha
Yoga’s objectives were to force the vital fluid prana into the central
*sushumna* channel of the subtle body to raise kundalini energy,
enabling Samadhi (absorption) and ultimately Moksha (liberation).

This sounds almost like a way to hack the system into achieving
liberation, but there’s nothing wrong with trying something new (at the
time). There were very few postures in the yoga compendium and poses
were held for a long time. Even at that time, it was understood by the
yogis that practicing asanas was only a small preparatory part of their
spiritual work.

By the end of the 19^(th) century, Hatha yoga was almost extinct. It was
shunned by both Hindus and the British. But then something changed. Two
men, Yogendra and Kuvalayananda emerged and became the founding fathers
of modern yoga.

![Woman balancing her body on olive-green mat](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1516208398649-d5d401ba8c49?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw0OHx8eW9nYXxlbnwwfHx8fDE3MzQ3NTg5NjF8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by GMB Fitness on Unsplash*

## The Founding Fathers

But first, let’s talk about Paramahamsa Madhavadasji (1798-1921). He was
a yogi from Bengal born in 1798 who travelled across India on foot for
almost 35 years. Not much is known about him but he was eager to reduce
the sufferings of the common folk, was an avid practitioner of Yoga and
towards the end of his life taught the secrets of yoga to a select few
and deserving students. According to tradition, he lived to the
remarkable age of 123.

Young Yogendra was a well-educated student who suffered depression in
his youth, at the age of 18. This was in 1916 and seeing him in such a
state, his roommate decided to take him to the Dharamshala of
Paramahamsa Madhavadasji. Despite his suspicion of sadhus, Yogendra took
an immediate liking to Madhavdasji and eventually studied Yoga in his
ashram for more than two years. After leaving the tutelage of his
master, he established The Yoga Institute in Bombay, which is now known
as the oldest organised yoga center in the world.

He travelled to America and Europe very soon after to try and popularise
Yoga there. People who met him noted that he was in many ways already a
westerner, having been educated at St. Xavier’s college in Bombay. To
the west he was a new kind of teacher emerging from the Indian
subcontinent, very unlike swami Vivekananda, often called “a blended
product of the East and West”.

Swami Kuvalayananda was a yoga guru born in 1883. He was from a poor
family but managed to get an education despite his economic limitations.
He was inspired by the emerging desire for Indian independence and was
fierce educator. He met a guru Manikrao who trained him in the Indian
System of physical education, which would form the basis of the type of
yoga he would promote.

In 1919, he met none other than Paramahamsa Madhavadasji and was
inspired by the yogic form of discipline. Joseph S. Alter, an American
medical anthropologist, notes “Though Kuvalayananda was spiritually
inclined and idealistic, he was, at the same time, a strict rationalist.
So, he sought scientific explanations for the various psychophysical
effects of Yoga he experienced.” Combined with his passion for physical
education, his fierce idealism and rational mind, he took on a
scientific approach to understanding Yoga and its processes.

Kuvalayananda started the *Kaivalyadhama Health and Yoga Research
Center* which still operates in Lonavla, Maharashtra today. Joseph
Alter’s words shed a light on his intentions for his research, “what he
himself had to prove was that this truth \[of classical yoga\] was based
on natural laws and universal principles. In some sense, pure, objective
science was to be deployed as the handmaiden of spirituality and
orthodox philosophy so as to establish what came to be the theme of his
life's work".

![Grayscale photo of woman exercising on top of large rock](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1560232657-ffb2e8f5938a?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wzMDAzMzh8MHwxfHNlYXJjaHw0Nnx8Z3ltbmFzdGljc3xlbnwwfHx8fDE3MzQ3NTkwMTF8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=1080)
*Photo by Wesley Tingey on Unsplash*

## The Physical Culture Revolution

We’re almost ready to tie it all together but we have to go back once
more to the west and the origin of ‘**Physical Culture**’—a health and
strength training movement that originated during the 19th century.
During the late 19^(th) century, industrialisation was in full swing.
Workers went to work in shifts and afterwards often led sedentary lives.
German immigrants who had arrived in the United States in the middle of
the century had been promoting ‘German gymnastics’. Even though these
physical education practices became popular, they were held back because
they were ‘non-American’.

But the sedentary lifestyle of white collar workers caused the emergence
of ‘**diseases of affluence’**. These were diseases linked to rising
economic development. Some of these emerging diseases were: type 2
diabetes, asthma, coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease,
obesity, hypertension, cancer, alcoholism, gout, and some types of
allergy. So, to combat these diseases, exercises were developed and
promoted.

Physical culture became popular and strength and health-training
programs were ubiquitous in the west. It is not surprising to us now
because we have become normalized to sedentary lifestyles, of working at
our laptops all day. The solutions we use today, to take care of our
health are nutrition and exercise. While these are both valid responses,
it is interesting to understand where this movement came from and what
it was in reaction to. We are stuck in the same socio-economic problem
and are easing the symptoms but not treating the cause.

This convergence of physical culture in the West and India's emerging
yoga movement created the perfect conditions for transformation.

Yogendra and Kuvalayananda pioneered different aspects of yoga in
pursuit of its revival. In it noted by yoga researcher, Elliott
Goldberg, that Yogendra’s system was “safer, more comprehensive and more
effective” and that he “helped strip hatha yoga of .. what he called
'mysticism and inertia'”. Yogendra was well educated and had been
emancipated from a need to cling to traditionalism. He wrote many books
on yoga, on poetry and even conducted research.

Kuvalayananda, on the other hand, was a rationalist who saw science as a
way to uncover what yoga had to offer to the world. He cared deeply
about alleviating suffering and used his methods in this pursuit.
Towards the middle of the 20^(th) century, he trained large groups of
yoga teachers in order to spread physical education in India. A strong
India meant a strong Indian nationalism movement. Both men, in the end,
followed their passion and gave the world what they believed it needed.
They remain important men in Indian history and culture.

With the emergence of physical culture in the West, the revival of
Postural Yoga in India and its subsequent export to western nations, we
don’t need to connect the dots too much to see what happened. In India
itself yoga was becoming popular as a tool for the movement of Indian
nationalism. In the past, the postures were described in words from
which a practitioner was meant to understand the flow of the asana. With
the advent of photography, yoga poses could be shown in pictures for the
first time in history.

So, Yoga in its postural form became popular as an exercise, as a weapon
promoting Indian nationalism and as a bridge between philosophy and
spirituality. Ashtanga yoga, Iyengar Yoga, Sivananda Yoga were founded,
each promoting a different philosophy towards the asanas as well as
crafting new variations and technical nuances. One of the medieval forms
of Yoga, which survived in Calcutta, was cultivated by Bishnu Ghosh. The
infamous yoga teacher, Bikram Choudury, founder of Bikram Yoga, falsely
claimed to have learnt directly from Ghosh and began teaching in
America.

So, not only did yoga spread, it became a mix between gymnastics,
occultism and a new-age religion. In today’s world, we see it operating
as a business and since its modern inception it has mainly been an
interest of westerners. A friend who had never visited India remarked to
me once, “So, people in India must be doing yoga all the time, right?” I
could only laugh and tell her “No”.

## The Pizza Effect: Yoga’s Global Journey

This is where we can now understand “[the pizza
effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pizza_effect)”. Austrian
anthropologist [Agehananda
Bharati](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agehananda_Bharati), who coined
the term says:

*“The original pizza was a simple, hot-baked bread without any
trimmings, the staple of the Calabrian and Sicilian contadini
\[“peasant-farmers”\] from whom well over 90% of all Italo-Americans
descend. After World War I, a highly elaborated dish, the U.S. pizza of
many sizes, flavors, and hues, made its way back to Italy with visiting
kinsfolk from America. The term and the object have acquired a new
meaning and a new status, as well as many new tastes in the land of its
origin, not only in the south, but throughout the length and width of
Italy.”*

So, after traveling to the West and back, Yoga arrived in India
symbolising something completely different to what it had been in
ancient times. Yoga now had many more postures, some of which had
nothing to do with ancient yoga at all. Yoga scholar Mark Singleton
noted that postures in Niels Bukh's 1924 Primary Gymnastics resembled
several asanas in modern postural yoga, suggesting that Krishnamacharya,
teacher of B.K.S Iyengar, had been influenced by the gymnastics culture
of his time.

Among Krishnamacharya's most influential students was Indra Devi, born
Eugenie Peterson in Latvia. As his first female and Western student, she
would become known as ‘The First Lady of Yoga.’ When she opened her yoga
studio in Hollywood in 1947, teaching stars like Greta Garbo and Gloria
Swanson, she helped transform yoga from a male-dominated practice into
something accessible to Western women. Her acceptance by
Krishnamacharya, who initially refused to teach women, marked a pivotal
shift in yoga's modern evolution.

The scholar Andrea R. Jain agrees with Singleton, noting that posture
"only became prominent in modern yoga in the early twentieth century as
a result of the dialogical exchanges between Indian reformers and
nationalists and Americans and Europeans interested in health and
fitness"

![Figure from Primary Gymnastics](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F1bd73189-f5f8-4cfd-b3e9-d001704dee6f_604x202.png)
*Figure 1: Photo from Niels Bukh's Primary Gymnastics 1924*

![Another pose from Primary Gymnastics](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fe8c5be62-ecd7-435e-af7c-2a407dde1a9c_380x240.png)
*Figure 2: Another pose from Primary Gymnastics*

So, we arrive at this point. What is yoga and what was yoga? It is not
an inherently bad thing that yoga has become what it is now. With
research we are seeing there is a plethora of health benefits and people
have noticed significant benefits that are hard to fault. But should we
be misled into thinking this physical exercise system we call yoga has
anything to do with spirituality?

It is most important to note that people will say anything to further
their own purposes. This tendency of human beings is neither insidious
nor evil but merely an instinct in self-preservation. We cannot fault
ourselves for not being well-informed. The roots of yoga go very far
back and what we can see is that in its modern form, it resembles less
and less what it used to be.

“Krishnamacharya's method, was "a synthesis of several extant methods of
physical training that (prior to this period) would have fallen well
outside any definition of yoga, making use of haṭha yoga, the British
army's calisthenic exercises, and Niels Bukh's primary or primitive
gymnastics from Denmark.” – Mark Singleton

The truth of the matter is things evolve, traditions change and systems
are updated. The postural yoga system is no different. We must remember
that while yoga teachers may say the roots of yoga are very ancient, it
is up to us to know that they are only slightly correct. The roots of
postural yoga are more recent than the advent of industrialisation.
Knowing that I wonder if our attitudes towards yoga might change.

This isn’t meant to condemn the practice of Hatha Yoga and it doesn’t
fault the foundations on which all of this was built—the yoga
philosophy. But let’s call a spade a spade. Let’s not pretend to delude
ourselves into thinking these postures will eventually lead to
enlightenment. Let’s not pretend that practicing asanas is bringing us
closer to God. Let’s be realistic, this practice is only a preparation
for a journey that can take us to the depths of what it means to be
human.

This form of yoga has had benefits that are often overlooked. It emerged
as a transnational act during the final stages of colonial rule in India
and as a uniting force that supported Indian nationalism in a time of
dire need. Its popularity has at the very least led people to take up
spirituality as an active part in their lives. Along with offering
healthy exercises, it gave a stimulus to learn more about oneself.

The practice of modern postural yoga can be beneficial to our bodies and
minds. While this is indeed one aspect of yoga, what were the others?
What did the system of yoga initially want to teach and why was it a
spiritual discipline that survived over 2000 years?

In the following essay, we’ll explore the philosophy of Yoga and Samkhya
coming up next week.

For further reading I’d recommend this article by Jill Miller: [Are Yoga
poses ancient
history?](https://www.gaiam.com/blogs/discover/are-yoga-poses-ancient-history)
