---
layout: post
title: "Nature Saying Hello"
date: 2025-08-31
categories: [essays, beauty, consciousness]
reading_time: "10 minute"
excerpt: "This essay explores the simple yet profound act of greeting nature, arguing that acknowledging the living world around us can reawaken our sense of connection and wonder. It questions our modern tendency to treat nature as a backdrop, suggesting that a small shift in perception can transform our relationship with the planet and ourselves."
---

Dec 27, 2024

I’ve traversed some beautiful lands. Places that truly remind me of
paradise lost, or found. I stopped at a small chai stall along the way
to Munnar. The man who ran it was there with his father. He talked about
how the region was suffering and they didn’t have any money. Even though
they had a small banana plantation, he said it wasn’t enough. I told him
how I found it funny that people from the city want to live in places
like these and people from these places wanted money. It was the classic
case of wanting what one cannot have—a cycle that’s hard to break.

The nature of our desire gives us this pull towards what we might not
have and might eventually want. There is a curse in this but maybe also
a small blessing: *it keeps us moving*. While that might hold true, it
also makes us tired. The chase for desires also brings us to a situation
where we must ask ourselves why we are doing what we are doing. Strange,
how desire keeps us healthy can also make us sick.

It’s like these tourists in this region and others. They flock to the
mountains or to beautiful regions that will accept them in hotels, guest
houses and homestays. This makes the villagers wealthy and gives them
much needed income for doing nothing extra except servicing these
tourists. A mild means of economic health. But in these same places the
tourists pollute—not only with their cars but also with their habits of
littering, making loud noises in pristine natural areas and with their
desire for selfies among waterfalls and viewpoints, completely robbing a
place of its beauty. Once the splendour of untouched nature is gone, who
is left to clean up?

Many places (in India and abroad—Mexico and Morocco come to mind) still
have bottles and packaging littering the habitat. The people who run the
hotels, guest houses, who profit from the tourists won’t clean it up
because they’ve already got their due. The people who weren’t able to
profit, whose homes lie next to the trash, where litter spoils the edges
of their villages won’t clean it up either because they feel it is not
their problem.

More than that, they are slighted by the slightest bit of envy at the
profit of their neighbour. This small example of how economic health can
also breed sickness is now emerging more and more in tourist places all
over the world. The only remedy to heal these places is to leave them
alone for a couple of years so they can return to their natural
state—but once the tourists are gone, will they come back?

I used to balk at the tourist culture but then started to think that
many tourists live for it and live by it. Better said, this is working
person’s respite from the burdens of everyday capitalism. They work many
hours and collect money, send their children to school and are busy most
of the year. They deserve this little break. But the traffic, pollution
and overcrowding shows us that we are all taking a break at the same
time. This might be influenced by the fact that our overlords—the people
controlling businesses in India and in the West—are enjoying their
Christmas break and have given the workers here permission to do the
same.

Eventually, everybody serves somebody. But it is still this tourist trap
I wonder about. A small elephant sanctuary lies an hour from me. Should
I go there? Do I need to go there? What will I gain by going there,
seeing it and then coming back? It seems like an option for those people
who do not know what to do. The ceaseless movement and distraction a
tourist needs is something I cannot really get behind. I need moments of
stillness and today, with its slow and calm movements, has been a
blessing.

I am listening to the birds outside my window as they flitter in their
habitat from tree to tree. Some birds’ calls get louder as they choose
to sit on the tree close to my window and at times others do the same. I
wonder about their lives too, do they wish to be tourists? Or do they
simply travel to change their climate to something more suitable. Do
they migrate because they have to or because they can?

Their calm and rhythmic chirps and sounds give me a sense of peace that
goes deep within me. Each bird has a different chirp and their melodies
can even tell us which species they are. Each way of talking is a
different species altogether and it made me think of how humans are the
same. Each accent among humans speaks of a different culture. While all
birds are birds and belong to the class of *avians*, all humans are also
humans belonging to the class of *homo sapiens*. But in that, we humans
express a remarkable diversity that is similarly reflected in different
species of birds.

While birds colour themselves and show off different tails to
distinguish species—humans colour themselves on the inside with
different beliefs. We have metaphorical ‘tails’ which are extensions of
the kind of culture we have grown up in and decided to follow. A
European human has many different cultural species. Collectively, they
differ from Americans and—upon closer observation— within Europe, they
differ from each other too.

The same can be said of Africans or Indians, the one’s from the south
are wildly different from the north, and different from the ones in the
East and West. Like birds, some humans migrate and some don’t. Like
birds we speak in a different pitch and make different sounds to convey
meaning. Some of us can understand each other and while others can’t.

My guess is birds don’t do the tourist thing because they don’t need to
escape anything. At least, not like we do. They are content in their
habitats and limit themselves to where they can find shelter and food.
With human activity destroying their habitats, they are forced to move.

Humans are also forced to move when capitalism (for example) destroys
the natural habitats upon which their ancestors once built their lives.
Farmland makes way for hotels, jungles become resorts and villages turn
into homestays. The desire for money and economic prosperity makes us
treat the limited natural resources we have as things to be used for
gain. We lose respect for all that gives us life and start thinking
money will do it all. But when the last tree has fallen and all the
rivers are poison, we’ll realise we can’t eat money. (Thanks Aurora)

I wonder how birds think of *‘respect for the environment’*. Are they
simply not powerful enough to make enough of a change in their
environment? Are their activities not enough to damage it? From bird poo
being a fertiliser, to their diet of insects and the pollination they
do—their presence in nature is a balancing act. So I wonder if they even
need the concept of respect at all. They are so intimately bound to the
plants and trees they live among that they are acutely aware of their
own interdependence.

> “Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be.”
> ― Leo Tolstoy

Why does humankind not have this reverence? Why are we not in love with
nature? Why are we blinded? Is it media, commercialism and advertising
that’s making us blind? Or is there something else…something deeper.
When I am tired of society and this incessant rat-race, looking at a
tree gives me peace. Better yet, looking at a tree reminds me of the
peace that already exists inside me. Is our culture not reminding us
that nature exists within us? Do we not get an education in the ways
trees transport nutrients from their roots to their branches and leaves?
Is our complex network of veins and arteries not similar to the xylem
and phloem of trees—just a different expression of different species?

If we really zoom out, we can see all of nature as one distributed into
different species. We know this from our biology that all of nature is
divided into five classes: animal, plant, fungi, protist, and monera.
The last two being types of single and multi-celled bacteria that we
find everywhere in nature, especially in our own bodies creating a
dynamic mix between health and sickness. Somewhere in our human desire
to dominate, we have moved from trying to dominate our fellow animal
species (that includes humans) to trying to dominate the plant and fungi
kingdoms as well. I truly wonder if we ever considered ourselves the
same as all these other classes of being? I wonder if we felt similar
and somehow related to them—would we still carry on like this?

I am still looking out the window. The trees have some leaves that are
yellow and some that are healthy and green. Occasionally, one falls and
makes no sound as it hits the ground. One of the trees has large red
flowers at the ends of its branches. The branches with the flowers look
like the most delicate ones, a poignant reminder of the gentleness of
beauty.

I cannot see any human traits in the tree and I cannot make myself
believe that I am like it or it is like me. But then a gust of wind
blows. The small plants below, their large tropical leaves start moving
back and forth. The leaves of the tree also start moving back and forth,
fluttering in the wind. I cannot help but see this grand movement as a
wave from the plant kingdom to me. A greeting in unison, orchestrated by
the wind towards me and anyone that can see. They’re saying hello to me
and I cannot help but feel grief—for all that my species has done.

I cannot help but feel sad, for I have no way of saying “I’m sorry.”
